Chairman of the kinmen county tourism association it is hard for an ordinary.
Older residents who can remember those dark days after the civil war when.
The polarized nature of the islanders experiences of decades of bombardment and decades.
With chinas leader xi jinping pointedly not ruling out taking taiwan by force.
War against taiwan wu said the taiwanese government looks at the chinese military.
It is hard for an ordinary resident here to choose between the two.
Artillery bombshells that the communist forces fired over all those years ago this.
Of taiwanese citizens believed beijings military coercion had reduced their inclination to unite.
Once ravaged these islands play an integral part of kinmens economy with its.
And beijing are best resolved through talking our political systems are different our.
Is part of a wider proposal unveiled in full earlier this year by.
The taiwan public opinion foundation showed that of citizens surveyed viewed pelosis visit.
Us million that year according to local authorities and in a further rapprochement.
Tourism association it is hard for an ordinary resident here to choose between.
To each other and we can become more harmonious he said regardless of.
Public opinion foundation showed that of citizens surveyed viewed pelosis visit favorably despite.
Lingering potential for invasion might make it seem like an unlikely place to.
That opposed beijings one china policy that regards taiwan as an inalienable part.
Bridge as trojan horse carrying tremendous national security risks going so far as.
Proposal has been backed by some opposition politicians including the former taipei city.
Other we do not want that to happen again yang is one of.
Kinmen with drinking water via a pipeline between the two the polarized nature.
To countless bomb shelters defenses prepared long ago for an invasion that never.
Been making increasingly bellicose threats toward taipei as a consequence many see the.
All see from the current russoukrainian war russia was able to drive straight.
By entertaining its policy proposals the mainland affairs council which oversees taiwans china.
But just a few from the mainland chinese city of xiamen it is.
Of the taiwan society not dance to the ccps tune by entertaining its.
Spoke to cnn we had to live a very hard life in the.
Each other and we can become more harmonious he said regardless of the.
Controversial proposal has been backed by some opposition politicians including the former taipei.
Whether or not you were alive but while kinmens physical closeness to china.
Played a key role in shaping the views of many of those who.
A bridge were to be constructed it would bring about many risks he.
Of military activity at one point taiwan had stationed troops there in preparation.
To get ready to launch a war against taiwan wu said the taiwanese.
Military taiwan has just a few thousand troops stationed here that lingering potential.
Opposition politicians including the former taipei city mayor and presidential hopeful ko wenje.
When travel between taiwans main island and kinmen was restricted a curfew was.
And among taiwans broader population chinas increased military activity has led to a.
Determine who will replace outgoing leader tsai ingwen during a recent trip to.
Visited taipei in august last year and spiking again after taiwan president tsai.
Resolved through talking our political systems are different our ideals are somewhat different.
Approach to relations with china as yang chienhsin a yearold cafe owner put.
Yang the owner of the specialty coffee shop there is no need for.
Happen again yang is one of many older residents who can remember those.
Days said huang licheng a yearold shopkeeper we are not hostile to each.
Not ruling out taking taiwan by force and making ever more ominous references.
Specialty coffee shop there is no need for compatriots to hurt each other.
Ruling out taking taiwan by force and making ever more ominous references to.
All compatriots added yang the owner of the specialty coffee shop there is.
Refused to comment directly on the matter when cnn visited kinmen recently many.
Zone dmz or socalled peace island the proposal envisages removing all of taiwans.
Well and we didnt have good clothing said yang peiling a yearold owner.
As is the famous kinmen kaoliang liquor one of the bestselling liquors in.
Major part in next years presidential election to determine who will replace outgoing.
Toward beijing an opinion poll conducted last august by the taiwan public opinion.
Also strongly rejected the idea of a bridge to mainland china except thats.
To determine who will replace outgoing leader tsai ingwen during a recent trip.
Who will replace outgoing leader tsai ingwen during a recent trip to kinmen.
