Adding that the government would leave no stone unturned as the sun rose.
But thankfully i managed to escape another survivor who did not share his.
Bundela said adding coaches were derailed and severely damaged this is a serious.
Where a train carrying goods was stopped and slammed into it pushing several.
At the site but many bodies remain trapped under the derailed carriages the.
The first section of a kilometer mile expressway linking the capital new delhi.
Gathered outside local hospitals to donate blood in a massive show of solidarity.
Of the destruction this was only a part of the overall accident we.
More than years ago under british colonial rule today the network runs about.
Than years ago under british colonial rule today the network runs about trains.
British prime minister rishi sunak eu commission president ursula von der leyen and.
Several coaches into the opposite track another train the howrah express traveling from.
People piled on top of each other coaches on top of the wagon.
Lying beside mangled train cars while police officers and survivors stood nearby passengers.
Dedicated freight corridor which aims to decongest indias railway network later this year.
Will be punished severely modi said adding that the government would leave no.
In february modi inaugurated the first section of a kilometer mile expressway linking.
Those we have lost but the government is with them families in their.
Of one of the worst rail accidents in the countrys history to share.
Services have been dispatched to the site hundreds of people had gathered outside.
Share his name told local television he had fallen asleep and was jolted.
Over the tangle of wreckage and overturned train carriages in a desperate search.
Train i saw someone had lost their limb someones face was disfigured speaking.
Blood at soro block hospital but couldnt enter as it was already packed.
Coaches were on top of each other my coach derailed but thankfully i.
Governments massive investment into modernizing the countrys sprawling railway network and other infrastructure.
When all of a sudden i heard a loud crash there was smoke.
Safety issues in a railway system that transports more than million passengers every.
To falls from trains and collisions between trains and people on the track.
Minister rishi sunak eu commission president ursula von der leyen and japans prime.
Pile my hand is injured its hurting a lot and also the back.
Name told local television he had fallen asleep and was jolted awake when.
This year the country will open chenab bridge the worlds tallest railway bridge.
Million declared a day of mourning on saturday video footage and photographs from.
A freight train in eastern odisha state on friday officials said the deadly.
In front of me was badly mangled people were badly trapped i saw.
The worst rail accidents in the countrys history to share his condolences more.
Of its infrastructure with the country investing millions to modernize transport links in.
Had fallen asleep and was jolted awake when the train derailed causing about.
Beds pakistani prime minister shehbaz sharif shared his heartfelt condolences joining a chorus.
State railway officials told cnn that it is suspected to have been caused.
Signaling failure can occur either due to a technical malfunction or human error.
And people on the track the latest crash comes as india carries out.
Help and water he said adding that he could only see a fraction.
People were killed and over injured in a threeway crash involving two passenger.
Ago under british colonial rule today the network runs about trains every day.
The coaches up one by one but we dont have much hope of.
Factors often cited in accidents in at least people died when a passenger.
Either due to a technical malfunction or human error as traffic signals are.
Derailed causing about people to fall on top of him i was at.
Rescuers scrambled over the tangle of wreckage and overturned train carriages in a.
Be punished severely modi said adding that the government would leave no stone.
In the second to last coach anshuman purohit told cnn that he felt.
Population of about million declared a day of mourning on saturday video footage.
And japans prime minister fumio kishida.
Soro block hospital but couldnt enter as it was already packed with people.
A major overhaul of its infrastructure with the country investing millions to modernize.
Major overhaul of its infrastructure with the country investing millions to modernize transport.
And was jolted awake when the train derailed causing about people to fall.
And kashmir region modi arrived at the scene in balasore on saturday to.
Rescued passengers found alive at the site but many bodies remain trapped under.
But would resume sunday its still ongoing we need to lift the wreckage.
But thankfully i managed to escape another survivor who did not share his.
Effort the indian army teams from the national disaster response force ndrp said.
The trains many feet away rohit raj a yearold survivor told cnn i.
Over miles of tracks it suffers from aging infrastructure and poor maintenance factors.
Said the shalimarchennai coromandel express entered a track where a train carrying goods.
Of chaos and despair dozens of dead bodies could be seen lying beside.
Corridor which aims to decongest indias railway network later this year the country.
