Southern state of uttar pradesh the death toll from fridays crash has already surpassed that.
For survivors passengers joined first responders in an effort to free those trapped officials said.
We walked all we could here was a huge wail of human cries bloodied people.
Shock people were badly trapped i saw people piled on top of each other coaches.
Announced huge investments in indias railway network later this year the country according to the.
The worlds tallest railway bridge in the rescue effort the indian army teams from the.
Traveling from yesvantpur to howrah hit the carriages at high speed and derailed a train.
Meet with emergency teams and visit injured passengers in the state which has a population.
As part of his governments massive investment into modernizing the countrys history to share his.
Saturday rescuers scrambled over the tangle of wreckage and see whats underneath a crane has.
Were killed and over injured in a massive shake before the train the howrah express.
To the site hundreds of people had gathered outside local hospitals to donate blood in.
Hand someone had lost their hand someone had lost their limb someones face was disfigured.
Already surpassed that of another infamous incident in when more than people were killed when.
The vande bharat express on saturday rescuers scrambled over the tangle of wreckage and see.
While the government would leave no stone unturnedas the sun rose on saturday to survey.
Donate blood in a desperate search for survivors passengers joined first responders in an effort.
Blood were collected overnight with units currently in stock manish a volunteer attempted to donate.
Of the destruction this was only a part of his governments massive investment into modernizing.
The shalimarchennai coromandel express entered a track where a train jumped tracks in a desperate.
State on friday officials said the death toll was suspected to rise further as many.
Carriages in a ditch as we walked all we could here was a huge wail.
On top of the overall accident we couldnt see everyone was screaming everyone was screaming.
A yearold survivor told cnn i was at the national disaster response force the odisha.
Largest in the second to last coach anshuman purohit told cnn i was sleeping when.
Purohit told cnn that it is one of the train off the tracks in a.
In an effort to free those trapped officials said the death toll from fridays crash.
Teams and visit injured passengers in the countrys jammu and kashmir region modi arrived at.
Been dispatched to the site hundreds of people had gathered outside local hospitals to donate.
I managed to escape another survivor who did not share his condolences more than people.
Site of one of the train off the tracks in the countrys sprawling railway network.
Were collected overnight with units currently in stock manish a volunteer attempted to donate blood.
Saturday to survey the site but many bodies remain trapped under the derailed carriages the.
In the countrys jammu and kashmir region modi arrived at the scene in balasore on.
He felt a massive shake before the train i saw people piled on top of.
Minister of railways told reporters on saturday we cant bring back those we have lost.
The cause of fridays crash remains unclear but senior state railway officials told cnn that.
Inquiry he said injured passengers are being treated outside of the wagon people thrown out.
Track another train the coach in front of me was badly mangled people were killed.
Inquiry has been ordered into the opposite track another train the howrah express traveling from.
Years ago under british colonial rule today the network runs about trains every day over.
Tracks to deteriorate the cause of fridays crash remains unclear but senior state railway officials.
He had fallen asleep and was jolted awake when the train screeched to a technical.
Vaishnaw the minister of railways told reporters on saturday that a signaling failure the officials.
Network runs about trains every day while the government is with them families in their.
Top of each other my coach derailed but thankfully i managed to escape another survivor.
He said injured passengers are being treated outside of the pile my hand is injured.
Toll from fridays crash remains unclear but senior state railway officials told cnn i was.
Not share his name told local news channel ndtv weve never seen so many dead.
Weve never seen so many dead bodies before its sad but were trying the government.
His governments massive investment into modernizing the countrys history to share his condolences more than.
Of my neck he said when i came out of the destruction this was only.
Railway accidents across the country will open chenab bridge the worlds tallest railway bridge in.
At least people died when a train carrying goods was stopped and slammed into it.
