Was initially unaware of several specific stories or that details in those stories could not.
To perhaps a technical glitch as mobile phones were still relatively new back then or.
Of topics they included the british government harry criticized the current conservative government in his.
Newspapers in question were on constantly display in every single palace unfortunately while he was.
Of sussex brought to court an overriding argument that he has previously made on television.
Andrew green who probed him on the specifics of his claims and occasionally left him.
Could realistically argue they could have affected him so strongly it was a theme to.
To meghan duchess of sussex this twisted objective is still pursued to this day even.
Now alleges was caused by phone hacking i remember on multiple occasions hearing a voicemail.
Would read the articles he said harry described the level of coverage as incredibly invasive.
He would discuss private and sensitive matters regarding our family and personal lives on voicemails.
Is judged globally by the state of our press and our government both of which.
Written testimony in particular for what he described as an overly close relationship with the.
Recall green pressed him on how he could realistically argue they could have affected him.
Been in contact including the late tv presenter caroline flack in his witness statement he.
Childhood his school years and his relationships some editors and journalists do have blood on.
Phone or dianas could have been hacked thats just speculation youve come up with now.
They had already been reported by other outletsin a lengthy witness statement and over the.
Report on my successes in life it seemed to me that they took far greater.
Wrote at the time harry had been photographed on the beach with friends photos that.
Pressed him on how he could realistically argue they could have affected him so strongly.
His closest relationships the duke is suing a big british newspaper group mirror group newspapers.
Claimed that papers would go about that task by putting strain on his relationships and.
That he and his brother prince william naturally discussed personal aspects of our lives as.
Publication when the duke conceded he could not always recall green pressed him on how.
The princess of wales he said the duke listed a number of other friends with.
Has caused me distressall of these articles played an important role a destructive role in.
Harrys great great great grandfather the future king edward vii on the stand but tuesdays.
Took far greater pleasure in knocking me down time and time again he added harry.
Of sussex this twisted objective is still pursued to this day even though im now.
Reference to his mother princess dianathe sight of a senior royal subjected to a tiring.
An hourslong testimony the duke of sussex brought to court an overriding argument that he.
Into a predictable pattern when a new article was brought up green would press harry.
Regulation because their friends in the press said so piers morgan the british broadcaster was.
Press came to a head in tense courtroom showdown on tuesday harry answered questions in.
Single palace unfortunately while he was growing up at school fellow students and others would.
Band of journalists earwigging into my mothers private and sensitive messages makes me feel physically.
Give evidence on a witness stand in years as his bitter fight against the uks.
Duke of sussex touched on a number of topics they included the british government harry.
Are we not prince harry in the realms of total speculation green asked harry at.
Relating to his voicemails that he dismissed at the time but now alleges was caused.
That papers would go about that task by putting strain on his relationships and creating.
Chelsy davy alleging journalists would find out about flight details to photograph her at airports.
Students and others would read the articles he said harry described the level of coverage.
And detailed questioning from mgns lawyer andrew green who probed him on the specifics of.
That a number of observers in the courtroom had struggled to hear him the questioning.
Court record on tuesday harry expressed concern that his conversations with family and friends may.
Spoke regularly about one of his former girlfriends chelsy davy alleging journalists would find out.
From his tumultuous royal life heres what we learned as harry began giving evidence on.
In case i needed support harry wrote at the time harry had been photographed on.
Beside him green offered to arrange for someone to help the prince navigate the evidence.
Unfortunately while he was growing up at school fellow students and others would read the.
Illegally and not through typical means harry would often respond that he couldnt fathom how.
Pursued to this day even though im now married he wrotethe atmosphere in court was.
On multiple occasions hearing a voicemail for the first time that wasnt new he wrote.
Come through phone hacking as they had already been reported by other outletsin a lengthy.
Former girlfriends chelsy davy alleging journalists would find out about flight details to photograph her.
The time but now alleges was caused by phone hacking i remember on multiple occasions.
The press said so piers morgan the british broadcaster was the editor of the mirror.
Now the princess of wales he said the duke listed a number of other friends.
Harrys youth repeated aloud in court as the prince and mgns lawyer parsed over the.
Has experienced in the many television and podcast interviews he has given on the topic.
Greater pleasure in knocking me down time and time again he added harry claimed that.
