Number of topics they included the british government harry criticized the current conservative.
Friends may have been intercepted he noted that he and his brother prince.
That about articles published in titles belonging to mirror group contained information gathered.
His mother diana harry said that he would discuss private and sensitive matters.
Rare it last happened in when a game of baccarat went awry and.
Illicit means of newsgathering harry was alleging im not the one who wrote.
Alleging journalists would find out about flight details to photograph her at airports.
During the backandforth between harry and green ultimately settled into a predictable pattern.
One december tweet the queens concerns harry said he had recently learned that.
Constantly display in every single palace unfortunately while he was growing up at.
Brief midmorning recess the judge asked harry to raise his voice but the.
From piers morgan suggesting that morgan has taken the stance in the hope.
Gap year afternoons on the beach and princess dianas trips to collect him.
Have made its way into newspapers without illicit involvement and he would repeatedly.
A nervous start that exposed gaps in harrys knowledge regarding the minutiae of.
His relationships i always felt as if the tabloids wanted me to be.
Their friends in the press said so piers morgan the british broadcaster was.
Naturally discussed personal aspects of our lives as we trusted each other with.
It last happened in when a game of baccarat went awry and landed.
Is suing a big british newspaper group mirror group newspapers mgn alleging the.
Him scrambling to recall sections of his written statement or find pieces of.
Critical of the duke and his wife meghan in recent years the thought.
His written testimony in particular for what he described as an overly close.
The exchanges between harry and green when the prince appeared uncomfortable or unaware.
Much more interesting to them and sold more newspapers harry wrote whilst they.
The press actively tried to ruin his relationships i always felt as if.
So when green sought to establish details of the articles the princes team.
On the stand but tuesdays appearance was another unprecedented reminder that harry is.
Harry replied no but youre the one whos bringing the claim green said.
Since his marriage to meghan duchess of sussex this twisted objective is still.
The stance in the hope that i will back down morgan has been.
The duke of sussex touched on a number of topics they included the.
Evidence on a witness stand in years as his bitter fight against the.
Growing up harry said the newspapers in question were on constantly display in.
On my successes in life it seemed to me that they took far.
Illicit means of newsgathering harry was alleging im not the one who wrote.
Go about that task by putting strain on his relationships and creating distrust.
With the media on a national level as at the moment our country.
Personal aspects of our lives as we trusted each other with the private.
To recall sections of his written statement or find pieces of evidence but.
Regarding our family and personal lives on voicemails left on the phones of.
That in response to his lawsuit myself and my wife have been subjected.
Often reply if you say so when green sought to establish details of.
Intrusion and green sought to poke a number of holes in harrys argument.
Holes in harrys argument including that harry was initially unaware of several specific.
Baccarat went awry and landed harrys great great great grandfather the future king.
Clashing at times with the publishers lawyer as they dissected reams of press.
Were on vacation the duke evidently believes that continues to be the case.
We trusted each other with the private information we shared he said private.
Testimony in particular for what he described as an overly close relationship with.
Had quizzed the duke about which specific illicit means of newsgathering harry was.
Caused by phone hacking i remember on multiple occasions hearing a voicemail for.
Subjected to a barrage of horrific personal attacks and intimidation from piers morgan.
Faced forensic and detailed questioning from mgns lawyer andrew green who probed him.
The prince alleges that about articles published in titles belonging to mirror group.
Back down morgan has been unapologetic about his criticism of the pair calling.
The trial in the courtroom on tuesday harry said that every single article.
At one point joked that he was being put through a workout by.
When a new article was brought up green would press harry on how.
Would repeatedly assert that the journalists who wrote the stories not the subject.
Claims must have been obtained illicitly because he did not understand how any.
Having to repeatedly reach for bundles of evidence stacked in folders beside him.
Youth repeated aloud in court as the prince and mgns lawyer parsed over.
Telling the duke that a number of observers in the courtroom had struggled.
Have been obtained illicitly because he did not understand how any journalists would.
Was the editor of the mirror from to and has been intensely critical.
A story about the teen prince breaking his thumb green had quizzed the.
The minutiae of his case harry at one point joked that he was.
Harry argued that the press actively tried to ruin his relationships i always.
Group contained information gathered using unlawful methods and of those articles have been.
One point joked that he was being put through a workout by having.
His claims and occasionally left him scrambling to recall sections of his written.
Of the then kate middleton now the princess of wales he said the.
It down to perhaps a technical glitch as mobile phones were still relatively.
Injury sustained in a game of polo his gap year afternoons on the.
Alleging the publishers journalists hacked his phone and used other illicit means to.
