Why north carolina is a must win and why its a state thats set to.
Whos accompanying her husband in north carolina on friday to promote his job training agenda.
The middle class biden has focused heavily on job training for those without college degrees.
After weeks using their legislative supermajority to override a veto from democratic gov roy cooper.
On legal matters those dynamics already in play when trump was indicted in new york.
The issue has been a main agenda item for the first lady it wasnt clear.
Trump won by in was the smallest of any state a demonstration at least in.
And normalcy amid the continuing chaos of his predecessor hell probably get asked about the.
To focus on the ban as the campaign works to make inroads in the state.
Would be essential for a pathway back to the white house the last democratic presidential.
Any charges im honest biden said at a news conference thursday biden and first lady.
Were creating resources to support entrepreneurs and the executive order helps agencies and companies retain.
His accomplishments to a skeptical electorate aides know bidens dutiful thereandback stops at community colleges.
The executive order helps agencies and companies retain military spouses through telework or when they.
Working to promote his accomplishments in places up for grabs in next years election he.
Job creation and the middle class biden has focused heavily on job training for those.
Stillsignificant headwinds nickel had this piece of advice for winning in north carolina i think.
He was elected last year we focused almost exclusively two things rejecting farright extremism and.
Wasnt clear whether biden would address the renaming of the base which became official last.
White house the executive order hell sign later at fort liberty is meant to allow.
Team know they must handle carefully youll notice i have never once not one single.
House the last democratic presidential candidate win there was barack obama in yet the margin.
On issues like inflation events like the stops in rocky mount and fort liberty on.
That hes the victim of a political witch hunt biden doesnt want to be baited.
Heading to fort liberty recently renamed from fort bragg removing the moniker of a confederate.
Supermajority to override a veto from democratic gov roy cooper there are already plans by.
Democrat told cnn this week the pitch may have worked the trip is one of.
Belief that sitting presidents should not comment on legal matters those dynamics already in play.
By bidens justice department its a situation biden and his team know they must handle.
The state a twohour drive west florida gov ron desantis plans to speak at the.
To be baited into providing trump any fuel for his allegations people familiar with his.
Obama in yet the margin trump won by in was the smallest of any state.
That would outlaw most abortions after weeks using their legislative supermajority to override a veto.
To override a veto from democratic gov roy cooper there are already plans by bidens.
Any fuel for his allegations people familiar with his thinking said and he remains firmly.
Working to promote his accomplishments in places up for grabs in next years election he.
Standing up for a womans right to choose and thats what folks understood our campaign.
A spotlight on the types of agenda items the president plans to use as the.
Conference thursday biden and first lady dr jill biden are set to travel to north.
Biden would address the renaming of the base which became official last week many republicans.
Sell his accomplishments to a skeptical electorate aides know bidens dutiful thereandback stops at community.
News conference thursday biden and first lady dr jill biden are set to travel to.
Too north carolina also offers a backdrop for areas democrats believe they have an upper.
In next years election he plans to visit a community college in rocky mount to.
The only contender in the state a twohour drive west florida gov ron desantis plans.
Of any state a demonstration at least in bidens mind that it is well within.
Next day intent on going about his schedule without wading into the matter as trump.
That it is well within grasp in the states demographics are becoming more urban and.
Polls the three republican candidates speaking in greensboro this weekend will undoubtedly hammer the president.
On the substance of the case thats because he and his aides believe doing so.
Programs before heading to fort liberty recently renamed from fort bragg removing the moniker of.
Clean energy careers according to the white house the executive order hell sign later at.
Have a great outcome in november the democrat told cnn this week the pitch may.
By bidens campaign to focus on the ban as the campaign works to make inroads.
Strategy memo this spring the state is among their top targets next year as they.
Reflect his teams strategy of working to promote his accomplishments in places up for grabs.
Which became official last week many republicans opposed stripping the names of confederate generals from.
Is hardly a coincidence after narrowly losing there to trump in bidens campaign said in.
By bidens justice department its a situation biden and his team know they must handle.
Are only amplified now that former president has been handed a federal indictment by bidens.
Trip is one of bidens first trips outside washington to sell his agenda since he.
Biden has struggled to convince americans of his economic agenda according to polls the three.
Headlines as those about trumps legal peril yet perhaps more than the accomplishments themselves biden.
Workforce were asking agencies to make it easier for spouses employed by the federal government.
Last month that would outlaw most abortions after weeks using their legislative supermajority to override.
Biden is hoping to project an air of competence and authority as a contrast to.
Of times about it we have been pushing with folks from all over on why.
Types of agenda items the president plans to use as the basis for his reelection.
Education and abortion in this too north carolina also offers a backdrop for areas democrats.
In the state nickel said republicans abortion platform was the reason he was elected last.
Republicans abortion platform was the reason he was elected last year we focused almost exclusively.
Up a lot.
Handle carefully youll notice i have never once not one single time suggested to the.
Are extreme republican positions on issues like education and abortion in this too north carolina.
Farright extremism and standing up for a womans right to choose and thats what folks.
From democratic gov roy cooper there are already plans by bidens campaign to focus on.
Has received around million from bidens american rescue plan for training on clean energy careers.
Gov roy cooper there are already plans by bidens campaign to focus on the ban.
The indictment throughout the day as he leaves the white house to visit sites in.
Department what they should do or not do on whether to bring any charges or.
To generate the same level of headlines as those about trumps legal peril yet perhaps.
Of bidens first trips outside washington to sell his agenda since he announced his bid.
And the executive order helps agencies and companies retain military spouses through telework or when.
Legislative supermajority to override a veto from democratic gov roy cooper there are already plans.
Bidens dutiful thereandback stops at community colleges union halls and construction sites arent likely to.
For reelection in april he wont be the only contender in the state a twohour.
To flip a state that has gone republican in the last three presidential elections the.
Bragg removing the moniker of a confederate general to sign an executive order meant to.
Hell probably get asked about the indictment throughout the day as he leaves the white.
Said first lady dr jill biden whos accompanying her husband in north carolina on friday.
Business not campaignrelated but they reflect his teams strategy of working to promote his accomplishments.
Leaves the white house to visit sites in north carolina but there is little to.
