Ugandas main opposition parties says that the harassment she gets on social media and messaging.
Women parliamentarians face comes from their male peers especially those from rival parties the report.
She faces the nowstandard challenges of being a woman in politics in addition to the.
Women protect themselves online less than a quarter of african national parliamentarians and local government.
One they would want to make it an issue the yearold politician who was a.
Were made about the age at which she got married and started a family what.
Many feel advocating for equity and equality is an abuse of culture and religious beliefs.
On issues like violence against women and genderrelated issues it will be a very big.
Able to share personal experiences as well as get training in digital resilience combatting online.
Twitter that she would be standing in ugandas presidential election against muhoozi kaneirugaba the son.
As executive director wougnet now active for more than years works with women leaders to.
Supporters the nyanjuraholics and has characterized her platform with a catchy hashtag thepoliticalantidote but with.
Than their male colleagues namazzi tells cnn people find us easy targets once you are.
A campaign of cyberbullying that would last for more than a decade ugandas computer misuse.
Engaging a bully for two days nonstop says namazzi but i was determined to be.
Capital city nyanjura is no stranger to personal attacks online which she tells cnn increased.
Shows women mps who promote womens rights and gender equality are also targeted the report.
Abusers want to silence her nyanjura tells cnn that shes decided to stand her ground.
And messaging platforms is worse when she advocates for gender equality many feel advocating for.
Cnn that the challenges with using the law to successfully prosecute online harassment results in.
To be left behind the ugandan ministry of information and communication technology did not respond.
Nearly three years ago and cover everything from the length of her hair to her.
Executive director wougnet now active for more than years works with women leaders to not.
Defend herself against a torrent of abuse speaking on why women politicians and public figures.
Numbers continued to decrease due to the online abuse that women were facing another study.
Stranger to personal attacks online which she tells cnn increased in volume after she took.
And their communities mwendwas team created a digital game digital safetea in which you enter.
Once you are a woman who is known you are a likely candidate for bullyingan.
Detractors this is something to mock she described an exchange in a whatsapp group shes.
The ugandan ministry of information and communication technology did not respond to any of cnns.
Advocating for she agrees that online engagement can be an effective tool in politics but.
Than a decade ugandas computer misuse act does not specifically cover online genderbased violence which.
Almost ran mad engaging a bully for two days nonstop says namazzi but i was.
Warns that many women are avoiding online platforms for fear of abuse but nyanjura and.
So many women who are not on any of these media platforms but if i.
Unless theres something youre running after one person said responding to nyanjuras announcement that she.
That this increased among women leaders and highprofile women with experiencing trolling many of them.
Bullying and therefore do not treat it with the severity that it needs she tells.
Alone says nyanjura before adding if women do not embrace the digital world they are.
Opposition parties says that the harassment she gets on social media and messaging platforms is.
Women between the ages of and surveyed in uganda said they have experienced genderbased online.
I am not responsible because i am not married she says and if they ever.
She gets on social media and messaging platforms is worse when she advocates for gender.
The recent amendment can lead instead to the law being used to silence activists or.
In europe attributing the difference to greater disparities in womens access to the internet between.
Media usually get lifted and shared across several whatsapp groups followed by abuse on all.
Back i want to tell other women when you stand up harassers will eventually leave.
And nyanjuras experiences are supported by the ipu and apus research which found that the.
Leaders it was very bad namazzi and nyanjuras experiences are supported by the ipu and.
Determined to stay engaged and to stay in politics despite the costsi almost ran mad.
Of threats which are presented with lessons on how to navigate such threats in real.
Or being carried in a drone a nickname given to the vans that have reportedly.
One person said responding to nyanjuras announcement that she intends to run in ugandas presidential.
Block bullies it guided me on how to report bullying to the platforms where it.
Filion gender equality programme officer for the interparliamentary union when there are women in parliaments.
Son of current president yoweri museveni if he runs first get married then contest on.
Explicit imagery shared without consentpeople weave through the maze of threats which are presented with.
The ipu following one in on european parliaments found that in comparison online attacks are.
Change the way that economies and politics and social policies are made says brigitte filion.
