He says he received a panicked phone call from his phd students one evening in.
The reef bronstein said theyre sometimes called the gardeners of the sea for that reason.
Evening in january after they had gone on a regular monitoring night dive they came.
It was simply shocking because this is a site we know intimately well for the.
The alarm as quickly as possible with fastpaced academic articles and public appeals we need.
Pathogen was doing so quickly and it is spreading to the waters off countries in.
Do everything that we can to make sure these reefs these unique reefs probably the.
Keep this place going because gives hope for other coral reefs in the world we.
Give the corals the chance to grow rather than be suffocated by algae which has.
Good chance that theres been transport based on maritime transport that actually basically helped this.
The reef bronstein said theyre sometimes called the gardeners of the sea for that reason.
The need for more invasive methods the dna analysis can also help predict what may.
Red sea pathogen came from bronstein said there is a very good chance that theres.
Themselves under threat the mass mortality is currently occurring south of turkey and greece but.
Our window of opportunity to take action is very very narrow and its closing rapidly.
Omesi said its very very important to keep this place going because gives hope for.
Not been overruled is that we might be looking at a pathogen that has always.
Seas coral reefs is not just a threat to a beautiful site these reefs are.
Said theyre sometimes called the gardeners of the sea for that reason algae competes with.
For other coral reefs in the world this is actually a miracle that they exist.
Make sure these reefs these unique reefs probably the most unique coral reef in the.
We can learn why we have this resistant coral bleaching a major aspect of bronsteins.
Research labs tanks and eilats aquarium which all use freshly circulating seawater we know that.
They called and said listen there is something very strange going on our site the.
With government agencies as well as other researchers in the region israel shares the gulf.
Saudi arabia with which it has no formal relations but underwater there is no such.
Very important to keep this place going because gives hope for other coral reefs in.
Bleaching a major aspect of bronsteins teams research is studying the environmental dna of the.
Sea urchins in january tel aviv university scientists at the interuniversity institute for marine sciences.
Water of the gulf of aqaba on the red sea the view is stunning expansive.
South of turkey and greece but it is making its way down along the eastern.
This place going because gives hope for other coral reefs in the world we can.
Tanks and eilats aquarium which all use freshly circulating seawater we know that it is.
Even killing them in the research labs tanks and eilats aquarium which all use freshly.
Bronstein said in addition one of the strategies of this species in terms of protecting.
We do everything that we can to make sure these reefs these unique reefs probably.
Sure that they will remain here for future generations bronstein said.
Urchins and was even killing them in the research labs tanks and eilats aquarium which.
Contact bronstein said the tanks are now covered in the algae the sea urchins normally.
Eilat noticed that in the span of just a few days the entire population of.
Surviving sea urchins that could be used to do so are themselves under threat the.
Tanks are now covered in the algae the sea urchins normally eat when we visited.
You see an individual or even a few individuals even when they survive thats not.
See todaythe threat to the red seas coral reefs is not just a threat to.
Of aqaba on the red sea the view is stunning expansive coral reefs teeming with.
Coral reefs without them the reefs are at riskdr omri bronstein leads the team of.
Studies and release journal papers choosing to sound the alarm as quickly as possible with.
Because of their ability to withstand high temperatures which causes coral bleaching and the effects.
That may be where the red sea pathogen came from bronstein said there is a.
And eilats aquarium which all use freshly circulating seawater we know that it is transmitted.
