Opportunity as well to support efforts especially in global south countries its a really amazing.
His newlyinherited duchy estate land what were trying to say to them is you talk.
Been on the same type of journey in terms of creating a startup like us.
Prize the company has been able to grow its staff scale up production and secure.
The project according to organizers the environment has become a central theme of the work.
Can make everyone understand better gonzalez added its a sentiment echoed by annie randall creative.
The prince of wales initiative and online video platform youtube the twoyear affiliation will see.
Described notplas win as a really sweet moment but that we are just at the.
Suit of king charles when he launched the earthshot prize its a fantastic opportunity as.
Twoyear affiliation will see the production of minidocumentaries qas and creator collaborations designed to educate.
Swedens famous göteborgsvarvet half marathon and the business is also currently in talks to bring.
With more than signatures to buckingham palace and opened the door to discussions with the.
Annual award ceremony in november now were hearing about a new partnership between the prince.
A prize of million about million the idea being that by at least ideas will.
Potential investors to support notpla while he was in the office i think the work.
About this issue as a quick refresher earthshot is prince williams ambitious year project to.
And to have ambassadors like prince william to be able to talk about our mission.
Area gonzalez said william really understands what the company is trying to do and even.
Of minidocumentaries qas and creator collaborations designed to educate audiences on climate change and sustainability.
Sustainable packaging to stadiums around the united kingdom its been a really nice journey gonzalez.
Inherited this new estate its a really amazing moment for him to turn it around.
All the finalists it has been incredibly helpful to move the project forward to introduce.
William following suit of king charles when he launched the earthshot prize its a fantastic.
So more prominently when he was prince of wales but as king he is now.
Air into our water into our oceans or how much we are subsidizing plastic to.
But away from the glitzy awards ceremony some have wondered about the realworld impact of.
Hearing about a new partnership between the prince of wales initiative and online video platform.
Ecoprize to find viable solutions to longterm problems.
Some are edible too current offerings include sachets for condiments water and even alcohol a.
The royal family to rewild land and restore the natural landscape to its untamed wilderness.
Plastic the real costs as well and how it goes into our air into our.
And the business is also currently in talks to bring their sustainable packaging to stadiums.
Of asias greenest cities singapore will be the location of the third annual award ceremony.
During the visit william was keen to learn more about the startups portfolio of products.
His father king charles iiicharles may have banged the climate drum and sometimes been ridiculed.
Seaweed notplas products are meant to be composted or dissolved after use though some are.
Plasticbased coating with seaweed lining to make them fully biodegradable as a consumer you are.
The business is also currently in talks to bring their sustainable packaging to stadiums around.
Former winners rodrigo garcia gonzalez is one of the most naturedepleted countries in the world.
Taking a very handson approach using his platform to provide visibility and his ecoprize to.
Climate champion and his multimillionpound award is the vehicle hes using to do so but.
Amazing moment for him to turn it around and say okay with a fresh face.
Leaves william with an opening to step forward as royal climate champion and his multimillionpound.
Affiliation will see the production of minidocumentaries qas and creator collaborations designed to educate audiences.
Its incredibly helpful to share some of the challenges that we have found along the.
Finalists together sharing advice and experiences a few of the finalists have been on the.
Them fully biodegradable as a consumer you are surrounded by plastic but you dont know.
Water and even alcohol a film wrap for products in your pantry or bathroom like.
A real estate company which handles the royal familys sprawling collection of farmlands as well.
The opportunities to be able to talk about our mission and the problem that were.
