For help and water he said adding that he could only see a fraction of.
See whats underneath a crane has arrived we will pull the coaches up one by.
Sprawling railway network and other infrastructure but instead he traveled to the site of one.
Of fridays crash remains unclear but senior state railway officials told cnn that it is.
Said that evening that search efforts had stopped but would resume sunday its still ongoing.
Modi was expected to inaugurate a new highspeed train the vande bharat express on saturday.
Was expected to inaugurate a new highspeed train the vande bharat express on saturday as.
At the national disaster response force the odisha disaster rapid action force and the states.
Soro block hospital but couldnt enter as it was already packed with people offering to.
From the crash site near bahanaga bazar rail station showed scenes of chaos and despair.
Minister rishi sunak eu commission president ursula von der leyen and japans prime minister fumio.
Chorus of other world leaders including british prime minister rishi sunak eu commission president ursula.
Kashmir region modi arrived at the scene in balasore on saturday to survey the site.
Of the overall accident we couldnt see the front the coaches were on top of.
Only a part of the overall accident we couldnt see the front the coaches were.
The death toll from fridays crash has already surpassed that of another infamous incident in.
Pradesh the death toll from fridays crash has already surpassed that of another infamous incident.
The back of my neck he said when i came out of the train i.
To the national crime records most railway accidents were due to falls from trains and.
Opened the door he could see the rest of the train off the tracks in.
System that transports more than million passengers every day while the government has recently poured.
Sudhanshu sarangi told local news channel ndtv weve never seen so many dead bodies before.
Responders in an effort to free those trapped officials said the death toll was suspected.
Station showed scenes of chaos and despair dozens of dead bodies could be seen lying.
In the northern state of uttar pradesh the death toll from fridays crash has already.
Poured millions into upgrading the system years of neglect has left tracks to deteriorate the.
Effort to free those trapped officials said the death toll was suspected to rise further.
Told reporters on saturday we cant bring back those we have lost but the government.
Indias railway network later this year the country will open chenab bridge the worlds tallest.
Bundela said adding coaches were derailed and severely damaged this is a serious incident and.
Authorities said that evening that search efforts had stopped but would resume sunday its still.
Prime minister fumio kishida.
Was disfigured speaking to reporters saturday narendra singh bundela inspector general of operations at the.
Understand what caused the crash ashwini vaishnaw the minister of railways told reporters on saturday.
Lost but the government is with them families in their grief this incident is very.
Coaches into the opposite track another train the howrah express traveling from yesvantpur to howrah.
Trying to run and escape from the train the coach in front of me was.
Top of each other my coach derailed but thankfully i managed to escape another survivor.
A part of the overall accident we couldnt see the front the coaches were on.
Factors often cited in accidents in at least people died when a passenger train derailed.
And the government has ordered an inquiry he said this century for india as far.
Saturday as part of his governments massive investment into modernizing the countrys sprawling railway network.
Windows crushed spilling glass and metal debris onto the floors train carriages were ripped apartone.
People were killed in nearly railway accidents across the country according to the national crime.
Station showed scenes of chaos and despair dozens of dead bodies could be seen lying.
My hand is injured its hurting a lot and also the back of my neck.
Saturday that a signaling failure can occur either due to a technical malfunction or human.
Sun rose on saturday rescuers scrambled over the tangle of wreckage and overturned train carriages.
Deteriorate the cause of fridays crash remains unclear but senior state railway officials told cnn.
Injured in a threeway crash involving two passenger trains and a freight train in eastern.
Lot and also the back of my neck he said when i came out of.
Including british prime minister rishi sunak eu commission president ursula von der leyen and japans.
Rescued passengers found alive at the site but many bodies remain trapped under the derailed.
Force the odisha disaster rapid action force and the states fire services have been dispatched.
