Year afternoons on the beach and princess dianas trips to collect him from school all.
Private information about his life between and he faced forensic and detailed questioning from mgns.
Have affected him so strongly it was a theme to which green would often returnin.
At the time harry had been photographed on the beach with friends photos that harry.
The duke listed a number of other friends with whom he had been in contact.
Number of observers in the courtroom had struggled to hear him the questioning was far.
Previously made on television programs and in podcast interviews that the medias intrusion and tactics.
Wrote i would simply put it down to perhaps a technical glitch as mobile phones.
As if the tabloids wanted me to be single as i was much more interesting.
That id listened to italso in his written statement harry argued that the press actively.
When they were on vacation the duke evidently believes that continues to be the case.
For what he described as an overly close relationship with the media on a national.
Dianas trips to collect him from school all were all the subject of stories entered.
Lawyer parsed over the fine details of several news articles harrys diagnosis with the kissing.
The trial in the courtroom on tuesday harry said that every single article has caused.
Occasions hearing a voicemail for the first time that wasnt new he wrote i would.
Of topics they included the british government harry criticized the current conservative government in his.
And his brother prince william naturally discussed personal aspects of our lives as we trusted.
Great great great grandfather the future king edward vii on the stand but tuesdays appearance.
Coverage about his childhood his school years and his relationships some editors and journalists do.
Many drinks the night before and having forgotten that id listened to italso in his.
In knocking me down time and time again he added harry claimed that papers would.
And of those articles have been selected to be considered at the trial in the.
Green sought to poke a number of holes in harrys argument including that harry was.
Left him scrambling to recall sections of his written statement or find pieces of evidence.
Evidenceafter a brief midmorning recess the judge asked harry to raise his voice but the.
And the duke overall the prince alleges that about articles published in titles belonging to.
Single as i was much more interesting to them and sold more newspapers harry wrote.
Whos bringing the claim green said earlier in the morning when discussing harrys use of.
Of sussex this twisted objective is still pursued to this day even though im now.
To establish whether harry remembered reading the articles in question at the time of publication.
During the backandforth between harry and green when the prince appeared uncomfortable or unaware of.
Year afternoons on the beach and princess dianas trips to collect him from school all.
Questioning from mgns lawyer andrew green who probed him on the specifics of his claims.
Been subjected to a barrage of horrific personal attacks and intimidation from piers morgan suggesting.
Asked harry at one point joked that he was being put through a workout by.
Flack in his witness statement he said he recalled unusual mobile activity relating to his.
On tuesday harry said that every single article has caused me distressall of these articles.
Harry criticized the current conservative government in his written testimony in particular for what he.
They could have affected him so strongly it was a theme to which green would.
The private information we shared he said private information about his life between and he.
Of sussex this twisted objective is still pursued to this day even though im now.
Harry criticized the current conservative government in his written testimony in particular for what he.
As i was much more interesting to them and sold more newspapers harry wrote whilst.
For press regulation because their friends in the press said so piers morgan the british.
Alleging im not the one who wrote the article harry replied no but youre the.
Testimony the duke of sussex touched on a number of topics they included the british.
To gather information about his life between and he faced forensic and detailed questioning from.
Pieces of evidence but after a nervous start that exposed gaps in harrys knowledge regarding.
Conversations with family and friends may have been intercepted he noted that he and his.
He appeared nervous at first and was at one point asked to raise his voice.
Journalists hacked his phone and used other illicit means to gather information about his life.
Is forging his own path away from his relatives and attempting to settle scores from.
Hope that i will back down morgan has been unapologetic about his criticism of the.
And tactics caused him significant distress and wrecked some of his closest relationships the duke.
Pub his broken thumb and a back injury sustained in a game of polo his.
Whether harry remembered reading the articles in question at the time of publication when the.
Statement entered into the court record on tuesday harry expressed concern that his conversations with.
And princess dianas trips to collect him from school all were all the subject of.
Stories could not have come through phone hacking as they had already been reported by.
The prince appeared uncomfortable or unaware of the minutiae of his case harry at one.
Now green said in response the exchanges between harry and green ultimately settled into a.
Partners he spoke regularly about one of his former girlfriends chelsy davy alleging journalists would.
Morgan the british broadcaster was the editor of the mirror from to and has been.
Reach for bundles of evidence stacked in folders beside him green offered to arrange for.
Harry was alleging im not the one who wrote the article harry replied no but.
Not the one who wrote the article harry replied no but youre the one whos.
Wanted someone i knew to be nearby in case i needed support harry wrote at.
Courtroom had struggled to hear him the questioning was far more intense and detailed than.
Chelsy davy alleging journalists would find out about flight details to photograph her at airports.
Multiple occasions hearing a voicemail for the first time that wasnt new he wrote i.
Sought to poke a number of holes in harrys argument including that harry was initially.
Before and having forgotten that id listened to italso in his written statement harry argued.
