
Multiple children aged around three are stabbed by 'Syrian asylum seeker' in French playground 'carnage': Mass-stabbing sparks 'absolute panic' among families before knifeman is overpowered

Several children aged around three have been stabbed with three young victims fighting for their life after a knifeman launched an 'abominable' rampage in a French playground today. 

Dramatic video shows the attacker, believed to be a Syrian asylum seeker, being pinned to the ground by armed police officers in a lakeside park in Annecy, an alpine town in southeastern France, at around 9.45am.

Horrified witnesses say mothers ran past them screaming 'run, run' in the aftermath of the frenzied attack, which President Emmanuel Macron has condemned as 'absolute cowardice'.

Witnesses said the knifeman had begun attacking the preschool children while they were playing at a small playground in a scene of utter 'carnage'. They said he had launched his onslaught on the toddlers because they were 'easy targets'.

Video taken minutes after the stabbing shows the attacker, a refugee identified as Abdalmash H, 32, carrying a knife while being chased by locals. Parents can be heard in the background screaming for help for their injured children.

Soon afterwards, armed police arrived at the scene and were able to subdue the knifeman before he was arrested.

Four children aged around three and an adult were seriously injured in the attack. Two of the young victims and the adult are now in a life-threatening condition at a nearby hospital. 

Video shows armed policeman subduing the attacker and pinning him on the ground following the knife attack in Annecy on Thursday

Six children aged three years old were stabbed by a knifeman in a French playground this morning before the attacker was subdued by police. Pictured: Armed police at the scene

Paramedics treat victims at the scene of the attack in Annecy on Thursday

Three children are now in a critical condition and fighting for their lives at a nearby hospital following the attack. Pictured: The scene

Witnesses said they heard the man shouting before he began attacking the small children in the playground. One of the injured children was in a stroller.

'He jumped (in the playground), started shouting and then went towards the strollers, repeatedly hitting the little ones with a knife,' a witness who gave his name as Ferdinand told BFM TV.

'Mothers were crying, everybody was running,' said George, another witness and owner of a nearby restaurant.

Another witness, who asked not to be named, said: 'The man was shouting in English, and caused absolute panic when he started attacking the little ones. 

'He wanted to hurt as many people as he could. He caused carnage. The young children were just easy targets.'

Former Liverpool footballer Anthony Le Tallec said he saw a group of people running at him before a mother shouted at him: 'Run, run, there is someone who is stabbing everyone all along the lake. They are stabbing children, run run!'  

He continued: 'I was so surprised, I continued and then suddenly the guy appeared in front of me, then I saw the police who were ten metrrs behind him but they hadn't managed to get him yet. He was so near to me so I got out of the way.' 

Another witness told Le Dauphine: 'We saw a person attacking children playing games, small ones, obviously that was his target. After people tried to scare him, he walked away and the police intervened. 

'He spoke English. At the beginning, we all thought it was staged, but with the cries of people, we realised it was reality.' 

A man told broadcaster BFMTV he saw first aiders working on 'little bodies, three or four years old, perhaps'.

The Interior Ministry said Abdalmash H is a Syrian national with legal refugee status in France after arriving in the country last year. 

He was not known to security agencies and his motives were unclear, an investigative source said.

An investigating source said: 'The attacker was a Syrian asylum seeker who has spent a lot of time in Annecy.

'He was in a park square when he started the attack at about 9.45 in the morning. He targeted children indiscriminately, and also wounded an adult.'

Verified pictures posted on social media showed Abdalmasih H. approaching the children wearing shorts, sunglasses, and a scarf around his head before he launched his attack. 

The knifeman was arrested soon afterwards following a brief struggle. Video shows three two armed police officers and a man pinning the attacker down on the grass before he was taken away. 

Abdalmasih H. was himself seriously wounded by police, and was rushed to hospital, along with his five victims. 

Armed police arrived at the scene and quickly subdued the knifeman (pictured), believed to be a Syrian asylum seeker, before he was arrested and taken to hospital for injuries, the French newspaper reported

Paramedics run to treat victims of the savage attack in the town of Annecy, France, today

Witnesses told Le Dauphine that a man began attacking the group of young children while they were playing at a small playground in Annecy, an alpine town in southeastern France, at around 9.45am

A paramedic runs to treat the victims of the attack in Annecy today in an attack that left several children injured

Paramedics and police officers are seen at the scene of the frenzied knife attack in Annecy

France's Interior Minister Gerald Darmanin tweeted: 'Several people including children were injured by an individual armed with a knife in a square in Annecy. 

'The individual was arrested thanks to the very rapid intervention of the police.'

Mr Darmanin confirmed that five people were wounded, including four young children, two of whom are in intensive care. 

French President Emmanuel Macron tweeted: 'Attack of absolute cowardice this morning in a park in Annecy. Children and an adult are between life and death. 

'The Nation is in shock. Our thoughts are with them as well as their families and the emergency services that mobilised.' 

Prime Minister Elisabeth Borne is now travelling to the scene of the attack, according to her aide.

Local politician Antoine Armand said in a tweet that children were targeted in a playground in an 'abominable' attack.

He wrote: 'We still know very little but all my support for the victims, relatives, law enforcement and rescue.'

And François Astorg, the Mayor of Annecy, said: 'Appalling attack this morning on the Paquier park in Annecy. All my thoughts to the victims and families.' 

Politicians inside the National Assembly in Paris interrupted a debate to hold a minute of silence for the victims of the knife attack this morning. 

The assembly president, Yaël Braun-Pivet, said: 'There are some very young children who are in critical condition and I invite you to respect a minute of silence for them, for their families, and so that, we hope, the consequences of this very grave attack do not lead to the nation grieving.'

Politicians inside the National Assembly in Paris held a minute of silence for the victims of the knife attack this morning.
