
Body is found in hunt for missing Minnesota mom Madeline Kingsbury, 26, as cops arrest the father of her children on murder charge following her disappearance two months ago

Human remains have been found in the hunt for missing Minnesota mom Madeline Kingsbury - as the father of her two children is arrested on suspicion of murder.

Adam Fravel, 29, was taken into custody and booked on suspicion of second-degree murder, according to charges listed by Winona County Detention Center.

Police said they found human remains on the side of a highway in Mabel 'using information generated during the Madeline Kingsbury investigation.'

'Because of this, law enforcement personnel have arrested Adam Fravel on probable cause in connection to her disappearance.

'The Southern Minnesota Regional Medical Examiner's Office are working as quickly as possible to positively identify the remains.' 

Kingsbury, 26, has been missing for almost two months now and this is the first time any charges have been brought in the case.

Human remains have been found on the side of a highway in the hunt for missing Minnesota mom Madeline Kingsbury, 26 - as the father of her two children, Adam Fravel, 29, is arrested on suspicion of murder

Adam Fravel, 29, was in custody and booked for suspicion of second-degree murder and is being held in Winona County Jail

This is Kingsbury's home in Winona, Minnesota, she hasn't been seen in two months

The 26-year-old went missing on March 31 after dropping her kids off at day care sparking a frantic search for the beloved mom.

Last month, special prosecutor, Phil Prokopowicz, pulled out of retirement to investigate her disappearance Kingsbury's sister confirmed to local outlets. 

Prokopowicz, who has been called 'arguably one of the best in the business,' has been assisting Winona County law enforcement, the sister said at the time.

'We don't have a ton of details right now as far as what specifically he is looking into as the immediate concern is the custody trial,' Megan Kingsbury told KTTC at the time.

Prokopowicz retired in 2019 from the Dakota County law enforcement agency. His recruitment came as Kingsbury's family maneuvered a messy custody battle with Fravel.

The children are currently staying with Kingsbury's father and a custody hearing is scheduled in Winona County for June 6. It remains unclear what Fravel's arrest will mean for the ongoing case.

Fravel, the father of the Minnesota woman's children, was the last person to see her alive on the morning of March 31. 

In April, through the help of his attorney, Fravel released a statement proclaiming his innocence.

He said at the time: 'Over the course of the last 12 days my family and I have been subject to a myriad of accusations regarding the disappearance of the mother of my children, Maddi Kingsbury. 

The 26-year-old went missing on March 31 after dropping her kids off at day care sparking a frantic search for the beloved mom

Madeline's sister confirmed to local outlets that Phil Prokopowicz, the former chief deputy attorney in Dakota County, had been brought in to help with the investigation

Megan Kingsbury said there was very little detail about the whereabouts of her sister. In a court filing, Kingsbury's family argued that concerns were sparked over Fravel having been the last person to see Madeline alive

'During these last 12 days I have cooperated with law enforcement at every turn, including sitting down for multiple interviews with Winona County law enforcement.

'I did not have anything to do with Maddi's disappearance. I want the mother of my five-year-old and two-year-old to be found and brought home safely. I want that more than anything. 

He went on to say that law enforcement had advised him not to attend press conferences or assist in searches 'due to safety concerns.'

'However, my non-attendance and silence has been inferred by many as a sign of apathy, or worse,' he continued. 

'That could not be further from the truth. I want Maddi home and for her to be able to be with our two children. God Bless the Kingsbury family and please bring her home safely.'

The Kingsbury family released a statement at the time saying 'nothing in life prepares you for this.'

'Nothing in life prepares you for this. The disappearance of our daughter and sister has been a waking nightmare with no respite,' they said. 

'In the days and nights since Madeline disappeared, the immediate family and extended family have, collectively and individually, been experiencing emotions and trials that someone who has never been suddenly thrust into this horrific situation could ever imagine.'

Kingsbury disappeared after dropping her kids off at daycare and a massive search for the missing mom quickly ensued

Fravel proclaimed his innocence in a statement that he made through his attorney in April

Fravel, who is also the father of the Minnesota woman's children, was the last person to see Kingsbury alive the morning of March 31

The family spoke of the mental toll losing their loved one had been having on them. 

'Eating is a mechanical act we force ourselves to do in order to keep our strength up so we can continue to advocate and search for Madeline,' the statement continued. 

'Sleep, if it comes, is fitful and fleeting. I have to think that the only thing that could come close to what we experience is the stress of combat, day after awful day.

'Initially, we were so overwrought that we couldn't bear to look at each other but couldn't bear to look away. 

'There were no words we could say to comfort each other and we felt alone and frantic. In the days since the family has circled the wagons and gathered from near and across the world. We will find Madeline. This is our mission and we will not falter.'

The family said being thrust in the 'national limelight' during a 'traumatic time' was only made worse by having little to no detail about Kingsbury's whereabouts.

'Members of our family and close friends coordinate closely with law enforcement and send out search teams day after day, every day,' they said in the statement.

'From time to time and as we see the need we use social media to encourage and inform the large groups of volunteers helping us search for Madeline.

'We're overwhelmed by the dedication and tangible expressions of love demonstrated by the huge circle of warriors she unknowingly gathered around her – her sorority sisters, coworkers at Mayo Clinic and other places, fellow students from her days at Winona State, other moms and her many, many friends, acquaintances and people whose lives she's touched.'

They vowed that they will continue to search for Kingsbury until she is found. 

Madeline's brother - an Army Infantryman - returned home from service overseas to also assist in the search

Family and friends said they vowed that they will continue to search for Kingsbury until she is found

'We will continue to search for Madeline. We will not give up and our family will come out the other side of this forever changed but forever grateful for the tireless dedication of so many helpers – friends and relatives, people in law enforcement, other first responders, social workers, case workers, legal professionals, child advocates and many, many more,' they wrote.

Madeline's brother - an Army Infantryman - returned home from service overseas to also assist in the search. 

'It's hard to imagine how it could ever be reciprocated,' he said of the massive volunteer effort,' Stephen Kingsbury said. 

'Our gratitude for all involved in our efforts to bring our sister/daughter/mother home will never fade,' he continued.
