
Shawn Mendes and Camila Cabello SPLIT! The Canadian singer and the Havana hitmaker reportedly called it quits for a second time... just six weeks after rekindling their romance

Shawn Mendes and Camila Cabello have reportedly called it quits on their recently-rekindled romance. 

The Canadian singer, 24, and the Havana hitmaker, 25, had gotten back together just six weeks ago, but have already broken up and this time it's final, according to The Sun.

'Shawn and Camila have a lot of history and they tested the waters again after coming back into each other’s lives,' a source told the publication of the pair, who were last seen getting cozy at a Taylor Swift concert on May 26.

'But it was just a fling and they’ve put an end to it now,' the insider added. 'They realized it was probably a mistake to give things another shot. Things ended between them the first time for a reason, after all.'

DailyMail.com has contacted representatives for the pair for comment and has yet to hear back. 

Over! Shawn Mendes, 24, and Camila Cabello, 25, have reportedly called it quits on their recently-rekindled romance; The pair seen on May 25 in New York City

The source concluded: 'In reality, both of them know they aren’t right for each other romantically and now they just want to move on.' 

The on-again couple originally went public over the summer of 2019 and stayed together through the COVID-19 lockdowns only to split near the end of 2021, after two years of dating.

However by the middle of April, rumors were swirling that they were back together – and confirmation came when they were glimpsed kissing at Coachella.

Neither Shawn nor Camila have addressed the reported split publicly as of yet.  

When their union ended back in 2021, the pair released a statement to confirm their breakup. 

However the source told the publication that because the rekindled romance was so short-lived they hope to move on without addressing it. 

All seemed well with the pair just under two weeks ago as they enjoyed Taylor Swift's Eras Tour at the vast MetLife Stadium in New Jersey.

The pair couldn't keep their hands off of each other and were seen looking very much like a loved-up couple in the VIP area, watching the show with their arms wrapped around one another.

Done for good? The duo had gotten back together just six weeks ago, but now a source told The Sun 'it was just a fling and they've put an end to it now' 

Moving on: 'They realized it was probably a mistake to give things another shot. Things ended between them the first time for a reason, after all,' the insider added; Seen in 2021

Not right for each other: 'Both of them know they aren’t right for each other romantically and now they just want to move on,' the source concluded; Pictured 2019

Reunited: The pair publicly reunited this April and were pictured sharing a kiss at Coachella (pictured). It was followed by a number of public outings with the duo last seen getting cozy at a Taylor Swift concert on May 26

Since their initial reunion they were seen on a number of occasions romancing each other once again, including taking a stroll in New York City while holding hands just over two weeks ago, and another stroll on May 25th where they both donned all-black sporty attire. 

That same month they also enjoyed a romantic dinner date in New York. 

In late April, a source exclusively told DailyMail.com that Shawn and Camila had been secretly dating for weeks and were 'seeing where things go.'

The insider added: 'Having played the field for two years now, they both know now how special what they had was. Not to mention that their sexual chemistry is off the hook. Camila turns Shawn on like no other woman. She always has.'

Shawn and Camila announced their first split in November 2021 but assured fans in an Instagram statement that they were still 'best friends.'

At the time, Shawn shared the breakup news to his Instagram, writing, 'Hey guys, we’ve decided to end our romantic relationship, but our love for one another as humans is stronger than ever.'

'We started our relationship as best friends and will ­continue to be best friends. We so appreciate your ­support from the beginning and moving forward.'

The message was signed 'Camila and Shawn'. Cabello also shared the statement to her respective Instagram account.

An insider alleged to E! News that Shawn 'initiated' the breakup talk, leaving Camila initially 'very upset over the split' until she 'agreed' they ought to separate.

Meanwhile a People source said the romance 'fizzled' after the coronavirus lockdowns when their busy work schedules resumed.

As they were: The on-again couple originally went public over the summer of 2019 and stayed together through the COVID-19 lockdowns only to split near the end of 2021; Pictured 2021

Announcement: At the time of their first breakup, Shawn shared the news to his Instagram, writing, 'We’ve decided to end our romantic relationship, but our love for one another as humans is stronger than ever'

'They had this intense relationship last year and spent months together during the lockdown in Miami. They both seemed very happy and looked like they enjoyed having a break from working,' the insider alleged.

However the dynamic is said to have become 'different' with the return of 'normal life,' according to the source who spoke to the magazine.

'They have careers that are taking them in different directions. They went from spending every day together to now not really spending any time together.'

In the intervening time, Shawn was briefly linked to Sabrina Carpenter and Camila to Austin Kevitch, the founder of the dating app Lox Club that advertises itself as being 'for Jews (and non-Jews) with ridiculously high standards.'

During the Coachella music festival this April, however, Shawn and Camilla were spotted locking lips, declaring in public that they were back on.

After five years of friendship, the Senorita collaborators decided to take their relationship to a romantic level in July of 2019.

The hitmakers first met in 2014 while serving as supporting acts for Austin Mahone's Live On Tour' concerts.

Camila was at the time still a member of the X-Factor derived girl group Fifth Harmony.

The beginning: The hitmakers first met in 2014 while serving as supporting acts for Austin Mahone's Live On Tour' concerts (seen in 2015)

Instantly connecting, the pair decided to collaborate on a song, titled I Know What You Did Last Summer, which was released in November 2015.

As their personal and working relationship blossomed, Camila and Shawn sparked dating rumors - something they actively combatted in the years leading up to their romance.

The rumors went into overdrive when the pair dropped the steamy music video for their second collaborative single Senorita in June of 2019.

Though the pair would officially confirm their romance in August, Camila and Shawn were photographed kissing on a number of occasions in the weeks leading up to the confirmation.
