
Justin Bieber is 'mad' at dad Jeremy over his homophobic Twitter posts but 'looking to move on' from the drama — as dad offers weak apology to curb backlash


Justin Bieber is 'mad' at his father Jeremy Bieber for dragging him into drama after he angered fans by sharing homophobic posts to Twitter.

Earlier this week, Jeremy, 48, reacted to Pride Month by sharing a rainbow flag meme that read: 'Don't forget to thank a straight person this month for your existence.'

The post was later deleted and he returned to Twitter to apologize to those he offended — but it did little to subdue the backlash.

A source close to Justin tells DailyMail.com that he is upset about being pulled into this 'mess' but has since spoken to his father and hopes it will pass.

A representative for Justin Bieber declined to comment when approached by DailyMail.com. 

Justin Bieber is 'mad' at his father Jeremy Bieber for dragging him into drama after he angered fans by sharing homophobic posts to Twitter; Justin seen in 2021

A source close to Justin tells DailyMail.com that he is upset about being pulled into this 'mess' but has since spoken to his father and hopes it will pass; Justin seen in 2011 with (L-R) sister Jazmyn, father Jeremy and mom Pattie Mallette

'Justin hasn't had many controversies lately. He is trying to lay relatively low and just be there for and their relationship and not try to be around drama. He has had plenty of that in his life,' they explained.

'But unfortunately, his dad started some new drama and now Justin is involved in the mess. He is mad at his dad for doing what he did but also knows that people will be talking about something else tomorrow and this will pass.'

After speaking with Jeremy, the source says that he and Justin are 'on the same page to not do anything stupid like this again' and are focused on moving forward.

'Justin has had an up-and-down relationship with his dad for years, and this just adds to it all. Justin's dad knows he put Justin in a bad position, but Justin is looking to move on from this as quickly as it started in the first place and hopes his dad is forgiven,' the insider continued.

'Especially since it is so close to Father's Day and his dad's birthday. Justin wants to celebrate his dad and not be mad at his dad.'

Jeremy's apology was published Wednesday and he insisted that he did not 'intend' to upset the internet with his posts. 

'Acknowledging the nuclear family is offensive? My apologies to those offended. Was not my intent. Not that my opinion matters,' he tweeted.

Days prior to sharing the controversial rainbow flag meme, Jeremy — who is a devout Christian — ranted about the 'need to celebrate families' amid Pride Month.

'U know the reason we're all here! The things this generation glorifies is unbelievable!' he tweeted.

Controversial: Earlier this week, Jeremy, 48, reacted to Pride Month by sharing a rainbow flag meme that read: 'Don't forget to thank a straight person this month for your existence' 

Tweet: The comment was compounded by a previous vile tweet posted on Monday, which read: 'We need to celebrate families. U know the reason we’re all here! 'The things this generation glorifies is unbelievable!'

Apology: The post was later deleted and he returned to Twitter to apologize to those he offended — but it did little to subdue the backlash

Moving forward: After speaking with Jeremy, the source says that he and Justin are 'on the same page to not do anything stupid like this again' and are focused on moving forward; seen in 2016

Fans quickly erupted on social media, calling out Jeremy for alleged hypocrisy for urging others to 'celebrate families' when he has fathered children by multiple women.

One fan wrote: 'Yes! thanks straight man, who left your woman at the time raising your child alone. You are definitely the best person to something about family, respect and love.'

Another penned: 'Says the man who abandoned his child and only came back bc he became famous.. that’s how you celebrate family?

Another wrote: 'Yes! thanks straight man, who left your woman at the time raising your child alone. You are definitely the best person to something about family, respect and love.

Others called out the star and said he would be 'nothing' without his superstar son, writing: 'don't forget to thank justin about all the money u have.'

Justin previously bought Jeremy a $850,000 house and was previously claimed to be sending his father thousands of dollars a month to fund his lifestyle. 

Another wrote: 'Says the guy who abandoned his son and only came back to his life once he was a millionaire.

One wrote: 'To be honest I think a person who abandoned his son and only came back to his life once he was millionaire is waaay worse' while another typed: 'you’re so pathetic.'

On display: Bieber has a 2.1million follower count on his Twitter platform

Backlash: Followers took to Twitter to lambast Bieber for his vile comments

Others wrote: 'Don’t forget to thank your son, who you abandoned as a baby, for the money that you have now', 'lol why would anyone listen to you on the subject of families??' and  'Sorry yes lets glorify families. The three ‘families’ you’ve started w three different women having kids all around. GLORIFY FAMILIES!!!'

As well as Justin, Jeremy had two children - daughter Jazmyn, 13, and son Jaxon, 12 - with ex Erin Wagner, whom he was with from 2007 to 2014.

Jeremy then married his girlfriend Chelsey Rebelo in February 2018, and together they welcomed daughter Bay, 3. Jeremy is also a stepfather to Chelsey’s 14-year-old daughter Allie.

He split from Justin’s mother, Pattie Mallette, just 10 months after she had given birth to the future global superstar following a troubled on off relationship.

According to Pattie’s autobiography, The Only Way Is Up, the teenagers were actually engaged, but called off the wedding when Jeremy cheated on her with a mutual acquaintance.

She also claims Jeremy was in the county jail for fighting the day Justin was born and that he often let his son down, regularly failing to turn up when he was due to take him out for the day.

There is no official recording of his time in jail at the time of Justin’s birth – although records are expunged after a certain period of time in Canada.

But he has got other offenses on his rap sheet. In 1997 he was convicted of assault and sentenced to 90 days in prison.

Close bond: Others called out the star and said he would be 'nothing' without his superstar son, writing: 'don't forget to thank justin about all the money u have'

Kids: As well as Justin, Jeremy had two children - daughter Jazmyn, 13, and son Jaxon, 12 - with ex Erin Wagner, whom he was with from 2007 to 2014 - he also has a daughter with wife Chelsea

Two years later he spent another 21 days in jail after violating his probation. He was also convicted of a second probation violation at the same time.

Then in January 2004 he was charged with assault again, but the case was dismissed.

Despite his criminal past Justin still seems to look up to his wayward father. Even though they were out of contact for extended periods during his childhood, Justin gave an interview saying: ‘I have a great relationship with my dad.

‘When I was younger, he taught me how to play some songs on the guitar, like ‘Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door’ by Bob Dylan. He taught me how to drive too.’
