Elizabeth I (7 September 1533 – 24 March 1603)[a] was Queen of England and Ireland from 17 November 1558 until her death in 1603.
Elizabeth was the last monarch of the House of Tudor and is sometimes referred to as the "Virgin Queen".
Elizabeth was the daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, his second wife, who was executed when Elizabeth was two years old.
Anne's marriage to Henry was annulled, and Elizabeth was for a time declared illegitimate.
After Henry, Elizabeth's half-brother Edward VI, ruled until his own death in 1553, bequeathing the crown to a cousin, Lady Jane Grey and ignoring the claims of his two half-sisters, the Catholic Mary and the younger Elizabeth, in spite of a statute to the contrary.
Edward's will was set aside and Mary became queen, deposing and executing Jane.
During Mary's reign, Elizabeth was imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting Protestant rebels.Upon her half-sister's death in 1558, Elizabeth succeeded to the throne and set out to rule by good counsel.
[b] She depended heavily on a group of trusted advisers led by William Cecil, whom she created Baron Burghley.
One of her first actions as queen was the establishment of an English Protestant church, of which she became the supreme governor.
This Elizabethan Religious Settlement was to evolve into the Church of England.
It was expected that Elizabeth would marry and produce an heir; however, despite numerous courtships, she never did.
She was eventually succeeded by her first cousin twice removed, James VI of Scotland, the son of Mary, Queen of Scots; this laid the foundation for the Kingdom of Great Britain.In government, Elizabeth was more moderate than her father and half-siblings had been.
One of her mottoes was video et taceo ("I see and keep silent").
In religion, she was relatively tolerant and avoided systematic persecution.
After the pope declared her illegitimate in 1570 and released her subjects from obedience to her, several conspiracies threatened her life, all of which were defeated with the help of her ministers' secret service, run by Francis Walsingham.
Elizabeth was cautious in foreign affairs, manoeuvring between the major powers of France and Spain.
She half-heartedly supported a number of ineffective, poorly resourced military campaigns in the Netherlands, France, and Ireland.
By the mid-1580s, England could no longer avoid war with Spain.As she grew older, Elizabeth became celebrated for her virginity.
A cult of personality grew around her which was celebrated in the portraits, pageants, and literature of the day.
Elizabeth's reign became known as the Elizabethan era.
The period is famous for the flourishing of English drama, led by playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe, the prowess of English maritime adventurers, such as Francis Drake and Walter Raleigh, and for the defeat of the Spanish Armada.
Some historians depict Elizabeth as a short-tempered, sometimes indecisive ruler,  who enjoyed more than her fair share of luck.
Towards the end of her reign, a series of economic and military problems weakened her popularity.
Elizabeth is acknowledged as a charismatic performer ("Gloriana") and a dogged survivor ("Good Queen Bess") in an era when government was ramshackle and limited, and when monarchs in neighbouring countries faced internal problems that jeopardised their thrones.
After the short reigns of her half-siblings, her 44 years on the throne provided welcome stability for the kingdom and helped to forge a sense of national identity.
Elizabeth was born at Greenwich Palace on 7 September 1533 and was named after her grandmothers, Elizabeth of York and Lady Elizabeth Howard.
She was the second child of Henry VIII of England born in wedlock to survive infancy.
Her mother was Henry's second wife, Anne Boleyn.
At birth, Elizabeth was the heir presumptive to the English throne.
Her elder half-sister Mary had lost her position as a legitimate heir when Henry annulled his marriage to Mary's mother, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Anne, with the intent to sire a male heir and ensure the Tudor succession.
She was baptised on 10 September 1533, and her godparents were Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury; Henry Courtenay, 1st Marquess of Exeter; Elizabeth Stafford, Duchess of Norfolk; and Margaret Wotton, Dowager Marchioness of Dorset.
A canopy was carried at the ceremony over the infant by her uncle George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford; John Hussey, 1st Baron Hussey of Sleaford; Lord Thomas Howard; and William Howard, 1st Baron Howard of Effingham.
Elizabeth was two years and eight months old when her mother was beheaded on 19 May 1536,  four months after Catherine of Aragon's death from natural causes.
Elizabeth was declared illegitimate and deprived of her place in the royal succession.
[c] Eleven days after Anne Boleyn's execution, Henry married Jane Seymour.
Queen Jane died the next year shortly after the birth of their son, Edward, who was undisputed heir apparent to the throne.
Elizabeth was placed in her half-brother's household and carried the chrisom, or baptismal cloth, at his christening.
Elizabeth's first governess, Margaret Bryan, wrote that she was "as toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever I knew any in my life".
Catherine Champernowne, better known by her later, married name of Catherine "Kat" Ashley, was appointed as Elizabeth's governess in 1537, and she remained Elizabeth's friend until her death in 1565.
Champernowne taught Elizabeth four languages: French, Dutch, Italian and Spanish.
By the time William Grindal became her tutor in 1544, Elizabeth could write English, Latin, and Italian.
Under Grindal, a talented and skilful tutor, she also progressed in French and Greek.
By the age of 12 she was able to translate her stepmother Catherine Parr's religious work Prayers or Meditations from English into Italian, Latin, and French, which she presented to her father as a New Year's gift.
From her teenage years and throughout her life, she translated works in Latin and Greek by numerous classical authors, including the Pro Marcello of Cicero, the De consolatione philosophiae of Boethius, a treatise by Plutarch, and the Annals of Tacitus.
A translation of Tacitus from Lambeth Palace Library, one of only four surviving English translations from the early modern era, was confirmed as Elizabeth's own in 2019, after a detailed analysis of the handwriting and paper was undertaken.
After Grindal died in 1548, Elizabeth received her education under her brother Edward's tutor, Roger Ascham, a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be engaging.
Current knowledge of Elizabeth's schooling and precocity comes largely from Ascham's memoirs.
By the time her formal education ended in 1550, Elizabeth was one of the best educated women of her generation.
At the end of her life, she was believed to speak the Welsh, Cornish, Scottish and Irish languages in addition to those mentioned above.
The Venetian ambassador stated in 1603 that she "possessed [these] languages so thoroughly that each appeared to be her native tongue".
