In the United States from 1920 to 1933, a nationwide constitutional law prohibited the production, importation, transportation, and sale of alcoholic beverages.
The alcohol industry was curtailed by a succession of state legislatures, and finally ended nationwide under the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified on January 16, 1919.
Prohibition ended with the ratification of the Twenty-first Amendment, which repealed the Eighteenth Amendment on December 5, 1933.Led by pietistic Protestants, prohibitionists first attempted to end the trade in alcoholic drinks during the 19th century.
They aimed to heal what they saw as an ill society beset by alcohol-related problems such as alcoholism, family violence, and saloon-based political corruption.
Many communities introduced alcohol bans in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and enforcement of these new prohibition laws became a topic of debate.
Prohibition supporters, called "drys", presented it as a battle for public morals and health.
The movement was taken up by progressives in the Prohibition, Democratic and Republican parties, and gained a national grassroots base through the Woman's Christian Temperance Union.
After 1900, it was coordinated by the Anti-Saloon League.
Opposition from the beer industry mobilized "wet" supporters from the wealthy Roman Catholic and German Lutheran communities, but the influence of these groups receded from 1917 following the entry of the U.S. into the First World War against Germany.The Eighteenth amendment passed in 1919 "with a 68 percent supermajority in the House of Representatives and 76 percent support in the Senate" and was ratified by 46 out of 48 states.
Enabling legislation, known as the Volstead Act, set down the rules for enforcing the federal ban and defined the types of alcoholic beverages that were prohibited.
Not all alcohol was banned; for example, religious use of wine was permitted.
Private ownership and consumption of alcohol were not made illegal under federal law, but local laws were stricter in many areas, some states banning possession outright.By the late 1920s, a new opposition to Prohibition emerged nationwide.
The opposition attacked the policy, claiming that it lowered local revenues and imposed "rural" Protestant religious values on "urban" America.
Some criminal gangs gained control of the beer and liquor supply in some cities.
The Twenty-first Amendment ended Prohibition, though it continued in some states.
To date, this is the only time in American history in which a constitutional amendment was passed for the purpose of repealing another.Some research indicates that alcohol consumption declined substantially due to Prohibition.
Rates of liver cirrhosis, alcoholic psychosis, and infant mortality also declined.
Other research indicates that Prohibition did not reduce alcohol consumption in the long term.
Some studies indicates that Prohibition's lowered the rates of crime and violence to some extent.
Support for Prohibition diminished steadily throughout its duration, and lowered government tax revenues at a critical time before and during the Great Depression.
On November 18, 1918, prior to ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment, the U.S. Congress passed the temporary Wartime Prohibition Act, which banned the sale of alcoholic beverages having an alcohol content of greater than 1.28%.
This act, which had been intended to save grain for the war effort, was passed after the armistice ending World War I was signed on November 11, 1918.
The Wartime Prohibition Act took effect June 30, 1919, with July 1 becoming known as the "Thirsty First".
The U.S. Senate proposed the Eighteenth Amendment on December 18, 1917.
Upon being approved by a 36th state on January 16, 1919, the amendment was ratified as a part of the Constitution.
By the terms of the amendment, the country went dry one year later, on January 17, 1920.
On October 28, 1919, Congress passed the Volstead Act, the popular name for the National Prohibition Act, over President Woodrow Wilson's veto.
The act established the legal definition of intoxicating liquors as well as penalties for producing them.
Although the Volstead Act prohibited the sale of alcohol, the federal government lacked resources to enforce it.Prohibition was successful in reducing the amount of liquor consumed, cirrhosis death rates, admissions to state mental hospitals for alcoholic psychosis, arrests for public drunkenness, and rates of absenteeism.
While many state that Prohibition stimulated the proliferation of rampant underground, organized and widespread criminal activity,  Kenneth D. Rose and Georges-Franck Pinard maintain that there was no increase in crime during the Prohibition era and that such claims are "rooted in the impressionistic rather than the factual."
By 1925, there were anywhere from 30,000 to 100,000 speakeasy clubs in New York City alone.
Wet opposition talked of personal liberty, new tax revenues from legal beer and liquor, and the scourge of organized crime.
On March 22, 1933, President Franklin Roosevelt signed into law the Cullen–Harrison Act, legalizing beer with an alcohol content of 3.2% (by weight) and wine of a similarly low alcohol content.
Subsequently on December 5, ratification of the Twenty-first Amendment repealed the Eighteenth Amendment.
However, United States federal law still prohibits the manufacture of distilled spirits without meeting numerous licensing requirements that make it impractical to produce spirits for personal beverage use.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages has been a contentious topic in America since the colonial period.
On March 26, 1636 the legislature of New Somersetshire met at what is now Saco, Maine and adopted a law limiting the sale of "strong liquor or wyne", although carving out exceptions for "lodger[s]" and allowing serving to "laborers on working days for one hower at dinner."
In May 1657, the General Court of Massachusetts made the sale of strong liquor "whether known by the name of rum, whisky, wine, brandy, etc."
to the Native Americans illegal.
[dubious  – discuss]In general, informal social controls in the home and community helped maintain the expectation that the abuse of alcohol was unacceptable: "Drunkenness was condemned and punished, but only as an abuse of a God-given gift.
Drink itself was not looked upon as culpable, any more than food deserved blame for the sin of gluttony.
Excess was a personal indiscretion."
When informal controls failed, there were legal options.Shortly after the United States obtained independence, the Whiskey Rebellion took place in western Pennsylvania in protest of government-imposed taxes on whiskey.
Although the taxes were primarily levied to help pay down the newly formed national debt, it also received support from some social reformers, who hoped a "sin tax" would raise public awareness about the harmful effects of alcohol.
The whiskey tax was repealed after Thomas Jefferson's Democratic-Republican Party, which opposed the Federalist Party of Alexander Hamilton, came to power in 1800.
Benjamin Rush, one of the foremost physicians of the late 18th century, believed in moderation rather than prohibition.
In his treatise, "The Inquiry into the Effects of Ardent Spirits upon the Human Body and Mind" (1784), Rush argued that the excessive use of alcohol was injurious to physical and psychological health, labeling drunkenness as a disease.
Apparently influenced by Rush's widely discussed belief, about 200 farmers in a Connecticut community formed a temperance association in 1789.
Similar associations were formed in Virginia in 1800 and New York in 1808.
Within a decade, other temperance groups had formed in eight states, some of them being statewide organizations.
