Brave New World is a dystopian novel by English author Aldous Huxley, written in 1931 and published in 1932.
Largely set in a futuristic World State, whose citizens are environmentally engineered into an intelligence-based social hierarchy, the novel anticipates huge scientific advancements in reproductive technology, sleep-learning, psychological manipulation and classical conditioning that are combined to make a dystopian society which is challenged by the story's protagonist.
Huxley followed this book with a reassessment in essay form, Brave New World Revisited (1958), and with his final novel, Island (1962), the utopian counterpart.
This novel is often compared to George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949).In 1999, the Modern Library ranked Brave New World at number 5 on its list of the 100 best English-language novels of the 20th century.
In 2003, Robert McCrum, writing for The Observer, included Brave New World chronologically at number 53 in "the top 100 greatest novels of all time",  and the novel was listed at number 87 on The Big Read survey by the BBC.
Brave New World  has frequently been banned and challenged since its original publication.
It has landed on the American Library Association list of top 100 banned and challenged books of the decade since the association began the list in 1990.
The title Brave New World derives from Miranda's speech in William Shakespeare's The Tempest, Act V, Scene I: O wonder!How many goodly creatures are there here!How beauteous mankind is!
O brave new world,That has such people in't.
Shakespeare's use of the phrase is intended ironically, as the speaker is failing to recognise the evil nature of the island's visitors because of her innocence.
Indeed, the next speaker replies to Miranda's innocent observation with the statement "They are new to thee..."Translations of the title often allude to similar expressions used in domestic works of literature: the French edition of the work is entitled Le Meilleur des mondes (The Best of All Worlds), an allusion to an expression used by the philosopher Gottfried Leibniz  and satirised in Candide, Ou l'Optimisme by Voltaire (1759).
The first Standard Chinese translation, done by novelist Lily Hsueh and Aaron Jen-wang Hsueh in 1974, is entitled "美麗新世界" (Pinyin: Měilì Xīn Shìjiè, literally "Beautiful New World").Huxley wrote Brave New World whilst living in Sanary-sur-Mer, France, in the four months from May to August 1931.
By this time, Huxley had already established himself as a writer and social satirist.
He was a contributor to Vanity Fair and Vogue magazines, and had published a collection of his poetry (The Burning Wheel, 1916) and four successful satirical novels: Crome Yellow (1921), Antic Hay (1923), Those Barren Leaves (1925), and Point Counter Point (1928).
Brave New World was Huxley's fifth novel and first dystopian work.A passage in Crome Yellow contains a brief pre-figuring of Brave New World, showing that Huxley had such a future in mind already in 1921.
Mr. Scogan, one of the earlier book's characters, describes an "impersonal generation" of the future that will "take the place of Nature's hideous system.
In vast state incubators, rows upon rows of gravid bottles will supply the world with the population it requires.
The family system will disappear; society, sapped at its very base, will have to find new foundations; and Eros, beautifully and irresponsibly free, will flit like a gay butterfly from flower to flower through a sunlit world.
"Huxley said that Brave New World was inspired by the utopian novels of H. G. Wells, including A Modern Utopia (1905), and as a parody  of Men Like Gods (1923).
Wells' hopeful vision of the future's possibilities gave Huxley the idea to begin writing a parody of the novels, which became Brave New World.
He wrote in a letter to Mrs. Arthur Goldsmith, an American acquaintance, that he had "been having a little fun pulling the leg of H. G. Wells", but then he "got caught up in the excitement of [his] own ideas."
Unlike the most popular optimistic utopian novels of the time, Huxley sought to provide a frightening vision of the future.
Huxley referred to Brave New World as a "negative utopia", somewhat influenced by Wells's own The Sleeper Awakes (dealing with subjects like corporate tyranny and behavioural conditioning) and the works of D. H. Lawrence.
For his part Wells published, two years after Brave New World, his own Utopian Shape of Things to Come.
Seeking to refute the argument of Huxley's Mustafa Mond - that moronic underclasses were a necessary "social gyroscope" and that a society composed solely of intelligent, assertive "Alphas" would inevitably disintegrate in internecine struggle - Wells depicted a stable egalitarian society emerging after several generations of a reforming elite having complete control of education throughout the world.
In the future depicted in Wells' book, posterity remembers Huxley as "a reactionary writer".
The scientific futurism in Brave New World is believed to be appropriated from Daedalus  by J.
B. S. Haldane.
The events of the Depression in the UK in 1931, with its mass unemployment and the abandonment of the gold currency standard, persuaded Huxley to assert that stability was the "primal and ultimate need" if civilisation was to survive the present crisis.
The Brave New World character Mustapha Mond, Resident World Controller of Western Europe, is named after Sir Alfred Mond.
Shortly before writing the novel, Huxley visited Mond's technologically advanced plant near Billingham, north east England, and it made a great impression on him.
: xxii Huxley used the setting and characters in his science fiction novel to express widely felt anxieties, particularly the fear of losing individual identity in the fast-paced world of the future.
An early trip to the United States gave Brave New World much of its character.
Huxley was outraged by the culture of youth, commercial cheeriness, sexual promiscuity, and the inward-looking nature of many Americans;  he had also found the book My Life and Work by Henry Ford on the boat to America, and he saw the book's principles applied in everything he encountered after leaving San Francisco.
: viii The novel opens in the World State city of London in AF (After Ford) 632 (AD 2540 in the Gregorian calendar), where citizens are engineered through artificial wombs and childhood indoctrination programmes into predetermined classes (or castes) based on intelligence and labour.
Lenina Crowne, a hatchery worker, is popular and sexually desirable, but Bernard Marx, a psychologist, is not.
He is shorter in stature than the average member of his high caste, which gives him an inferiority complex.
His work with sleep-learning allows him to understand, and disapprove of, his society's methods of keeping its citizens peaceful, which includes their constant consumption of a soothing, happiness-producing drug called "soma".
Courting disaster, Bernard is vocal and arrogant about his criticisms, and his boss contemplates exiling him to Iceland because of his nonconformity.
His only friend is Helmholtz Watson, a gifted writer who finds it difficult to use his talents creatively in their pain-free society.Bernard takes a holiday with Lenina outside the World State to a Savage Reservation in New Mexico, in which the two observe natural-born people, disease, the ageing process, other languages, and religious lifestyles for the first time.
The culture of the village folk resembles the contemporary Native American groups of the region, descendants of the Anasazi, including the Puebloan peoples of Hopi and Zuni.
Bernard and Lenina witness a violent public ritual and then encounter Linda, a woman originally from the World State who is living on the reservation with her son John, now a young man.
She, too, visited the reservation on a holiday many years ago, but became separated from her group and was left behind.
She had meanwhile become pregnant by a fellow holidaymaker (who is revealed to be Bernard's boss, the Director of Hatcheries and Conditioning).
She did not try to return to the World State, because of her shame at her pregnancy.
Despite spending his whole life in the reservation, John has never been accepted by the villagers, and his and Linda's lives have been hard and unpleasant.
Linda has taught John to read, although from the only book in her possession—a scientific manual—and another book John found: the complete works of Shakespeare.
Ostracised by the villagers, John is able to articulate his feelings only in terms of Shakespearean drama, quoting often from The Tempest, King Lear, Othello, Romeo and Juliet and Hamlet.
Linda now wants to return to London, and John, too, wants to see this "brave new world".
Bernard sees an opportunity to thwart plans to exile him, and gets permission to take Linda and John back.
