Harriet Tubman (born Araminta Ross, c. March 1822  – March 10, 1913) was an American abolitionist and social activist.
Born into chattel slavery, Tubman escaped and subsequently made some 13 missions to rescue approximately 70 similarly-enslaved people, including her family and friends,  using the network of antislavery activists and safe houses known as the Underground Railroad.
During the American Civil War, she served as an armed scout and spy for the Union Army.
In her later years, Tubman was an activist in the movement for women's suffrage.Born into slavery in Dorchester County, Maryland, Tubman was beaten and whipped by various slaveholders as a child.
Early in life, she suffered a traumatic head wound when an irate enslaver threw a heavy metal weight, intending to hit another enslaved person, but hit her instead.
The injury caused dizziness, pain, and spells of hypersomnia, which occurred throughout her life.
After her injury, Tubman began experiencing strange visions and vivid dreams, which she ascribed to premonitions from God.
These experiences, combined with her Methodist upbringing, led her to become devoutly religious.In 1849, Tubman escaped to Philadelphia, only to return to Maryland to rescue her family soon after.
Slowly, one group at a time, she brought relatives with her out of the state, and eventually guided dozens of other enslaved people to freedom.
Traveling by night and in extreme secrecy, Tubman (or "Moses", as she was called) "never lost a passenger".
After the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 was passed, she helped guide escapees farther north into British North America (Canada), and helped newly freed people find work.
Tubman met John Brown in 1858, and helped him plan and recruit supporters for his 1859 raid on Harpers Ferry.When the Civil War began, Tubman worked for the Union Army, first as a cook and nurse, and then as an armed scout and spy.
The first woman to lead an armed expedition in the war, she guided the raid at Combahee Ferry, which liberated more than 700 enslaved people.
After the war, she retired to the family home on property she had purchased in 1859 in Auburn, New York, where she cared for her aging parents.
She was active in the women's suffrage movement until illness overtook her, and she had to be admitted to a home for elderly African Americans that she had helped to establish years earlier.
She became an icon of courage and freedom.Tubman was born Araminta "Minty" Ross to enslaved parents, Harriet ("Rit") Green and Ben Ross.
Rit was enslaved by Mary Pattison Brodess (and later her son Edward).
Ben was enslaved by Anthony Thompson, who became Mary Brodess's second husband, and who ran a large plantation near the Blackwater River in the Madison area of Dorchester County, Maryland.As with many enslaved people in the United States, neither the exact year nor place of Tubman's birth is known, and historians differ as to the best estimate.
Kate Larson records the year as 1822, based on a midwife payment and several other historical documents, including her runaway advertisement,  while Jean Humez says "the best current evidence suggests that Tubman was born in 1820, but it might have been a year or two later".
Catherine Clinton notes that Tubman reported the year of her birth as 1825, while her death certificate lists 1815 and her gravestone lists 1820.
Tubman's maternal grandmother, Modesty, arrived in the U.S. on a slave ship from Africa; no information is available about her other ancestors.
As a child, Tubman was told that she seemed like an Ashanti person because of her character traits, though no evidence has been found to confirm or deny this lineage.
Her mother, Rit (who may have had a white father),   was a cook for the Brodess family.
Her father, Ben, was a skilled woodsman who managed the timber work on Thompson's plantation.
They married around 1808 and, according to court records, had nine children together: Linah, Mariah Ritty, Soph, Robert, Minty (Harriet), Ben, Rachel, Henry, and Moses.
Rit struggled to keep her family together as slavery threatened to tear it apart.
Edward Brodess sold three of her daughters (Linah, Mariah Ritty, and Soph), separating them from the family forever.
When a trader from Georgia approached Brodess about buying Rit's youngest son, Moses, she hid him for a month, aided by other enslaved people and freedmen in the community.
At one point she confronted her enslaver about the sale.
Finally, Brodess and "the Georgia man" came toward the slave quarters to seize the child, where Rit told them, "You are after my son; but the first man that comes into my house, I will split his head open."
Brodess backed away and abandoned the sale.
Tubman's biographers agree that stories told about this event within the family influenced her belief in the possibilities of resistance.
Tubman's mother was assigned to "the big house"   and had scarce time for her own family; consequently, as a child Tubman took care of a younger brother and baby, as was typical in large families.
When she was five or six years old, Brodess hired her out as a nursemaid to a woman named "Miss Susan".
Tubman was ordered to care for the baby and rock the cradle as it slept; when the baby woke up and cried, she was whipped.
She later recounted a particular day when she was lashed five times before breakfast.
She carried the scars for the rest of her life.
She found ways to resist, such as running away for five days,  wearing layers of clothing as protection against beatings, and fighting back.
As a child, Tubman also worked at the home of a planter named James Cook.
She had to check the muskrat traps in nearby marshes, even after contracting measles.
She became so ill that Cook sent her back to Brodess, where her mother nursed her back to health.
Brodess then hired her out again.
She spoke later of her acute childhood homesickness, comparing herself to "the boy on the Swanee River", an allusion to Stephen Foster's song "Old Folks at Home".
As she grew older and stronger, she was assigned to field and forest work, driving oxen, plowing, and hauling logs.
As an adolescent, Tubman suffered a severe head injury when an overseer threw a two-pound (1 kg) metal weight at another enslaved person who was attempting to flee.
The weight struck Tubman instead, which she said: "broke my skull".
Bleeding and unconscious, she was returned to her enslaver's house and laid on the seat of a loom, where she remained without medical care for two days.
After this incident, Tubman frequently experienced extremely painful headaches.
She also began having seizures and would seemingly fall unconscious, although she claimed to be aware of her surroundings while appearing to be asleep.
Larson suggests she may have had temporal lobe epilepsy as a result of the injury;  Clinton suggests her condition may have been narcolepsy or cataplexy.
