365,000+ total dead 290,000+ total deadThe American Civil War (April 12, 1861 – May 26, 1865; also known by other names) was a civil war in the United States.
It was fought between the Union[f] ("the North") and the Confederacy ("the South"), the latter formed by states that had seceded.
The central cause of the war was the dispute over whether slavery would be permitted to expand into the western territories, leading to more slave states, or be prevented from doing so, which was widely believed would place slavery on a course of ultimate extinction.Decades of political controversy over slavery were brought to a head by the victory in the 1860 U.S. presidential election of Abraham Lincoln, who opposed slavery's expansion into the western territories.
An initial seven southern slave states responded to Lincoln's victory by seceding from the United States and, in February 1861, forming the Confederacy.
The Confederacy seized U.S. forts and other federal assets within their borders.
Led by Confederate President Jefferson Davis, the Confederacy asserted control over about a third of the U.S. population in eleven of the 34 U.S. states that then existed.
Four years of intense combat, mostly in the South, ensued.During 1861–1862 in the war's Western Theater, the Union made significant permanent gains—though in the war's Eastern Theater the conflict was inconclusive.
The abolition of slavery became a war goal on January 1, 1863, when Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which declared all slaves in states in rebellion to be free, applying to more than 3.5 million of the 4 million enslaved people in the country.
Former slaves who escaped from plantations or were liberated by the Union Army were recruited into the United States Colored Troops regiments of the Union Army.
To the west, the Union destroyed the Confederate's river navy by the summer of 1862, then much of its western armies, and seized New Orleans.
The successful 1863 Union siege of Vicksburg split the Confederacy in two at the Mississippi River.
In 1863, Confederate General Robert E. Lee's incursion north ended at the Battle of Gettysburg.
Western successes led to General Ulysses S. Grant's command of all Union armies in 1864.
Inflicting an ever-tightening naval blockade of Confederate ports, the Union marshaled resources and manpower to attack the Confederacy from all directions.
This led to the fall of Atlanta in 1864 to Union General William Tecumseh Sherman, followed by his march to the sea.
The last significant battles raged around the ten-month Siege of Petersburg, gateway to the Confederate capital of Richmond.
The Confederates abandoned Richmond, and on April 9, 1865, Lee surrendered to Grant following the Battle of Appomattox Court House, setting in motion the end of the war.A wave of Confederate surrenders followed.
On April 14, just five days after Lee's surrender, Lincoln was assassinated.
As a practical matter, the war ended with the May 26 surrender of the Department of the Trans-Mississippi but the conclusion of the American Civil War lacks a clear and precise historical end date.
Confederate ground forces continued surrendering past the May 26 surrender date until June 23.
By the end of the war, much of the South's infrastructure was destroyed, especially its railroads.
The Confederacy collapsed, slavery was abolished, and four million enslaved black people were freed.
The war-torn nation then entered the Reconstruction era in an attempt to rebuild the country, bring the former Confederate states back into the United States, and grant civil rights to freed slaves.The Civil War is one of the most extensively studied and written about episodes in U.S. history.
It remains the subject of cultural and historiographical debate.
Of particular interest is the persisting myth of the Lost Cause of the Confederacy.
The American Civil War was among the first wars to use industrial warfare.
Railroads, the telegraph, steamships, the ironclad warship, and mass-produced weapons were all widely used during the war.
In total, the war left between 620,000 and 750,000 soldiers dead, along with an undetermined number of civilian casualties, making the Civil War the deadliest military conflict in American history.
[g] The technology and brutality of the Civil War foreshadowed the coming World Wars.The causes behind Southern states' decision to secede were complex and have been historically controversial; most academic scholars identify slavery as the central cause of the war.
The causes are further complicated by some historical revisionists who have tried to offer a variety of reasons for the war.
Slavery was the central source of escalating political tension in the 1850s.
The Republican Party was determined to prevent any spread of slavery to the territories, which, after they were admitted as states, would give the North greater representation in Congress and the Electoral College.
Many Southern leaders had threatened secession if the Republican candidate, Lincoln, won the 1860 election.
After Lincoln won, many Southern leaders felt that disunion was their only option, fearing that the loss of representation would hamper their ability to enact pro-slavery laws and policies.
In his second inaugural address, Lincoln said that "slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful interest.
All knew that this interest was, somehow, the cause of the war.
To strengthen, perpetuate, and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the Union, even by war; while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it."
Disagreements among states about the future of slavery were the main cause of disunion and the war that followed.
Slavery had been controversial during the framing of the Constitution, which, because of compromises, ended up with proslavery and antislavery features.
The issue of slavery had confounded the nation since its inception and increasingly separated the United States into a slaveholding South and a free North.
The issue was exacerbated by the rapid territorial expansion of the country, which repeatedly brought to the fore the question of whether new territory should be slaveholding or free.
The issue had dominated politics for decades leading up to the war.
Key attempts to resolve the matter included the Missouri Compromise and the Compromise of 1850, but these only postponed the showdown over slavery that would lead to the Civil War.
The motivations of the average person were not necessarily those of their faction;   some Northern soldiers were indifferent on the subject of slavery, but a general pattern can be established.
As the war dragged on, more and more Unionists came to support the abolition of slavery, whether on moral grounds or as a means to cripple the Confederacy.
Confederate soldiers fought the war primarily to protect a Southern society of which slavery was an integral part.
Opponents of slavery considered slavery an anachronistic evil incompatible with republicanism.
The strategy of the anti-slavery forces was containment—to stop the expansion of slavery and thereby put it on a path to ultimate extinction.
The slaveholding interests in the South denounced this strategy as infringing upon their constitutional rights.
Southern whites believed that the emancipation of slaves would destroy the South's economy, because of the large amount of capital invested in slaves and fears of integrating the ex-slave black population.
