Macbeth (/məkˈbɛθ/, full title The Tragedie of Macbeth) is a tragedy by William Shakespeare.
It is thought to have been first performed in 1606.
[a] It dramatises the damaging physical and psychological effects of political ambition on those who seek power.
Of all the plays that Shakespeare wrote during the reign of James I, Macbeth most clearly reflects his relationship with King James, patron of Shakespeare's acting company.
It was first published in the Folio of 1623, possibly from a prompt book, and is Shakespeare's shortest tragedy.
A brave Scottish general named Macbeth receives a prophecy from a trio of witches that one day he will become King of Scotland.
Consumed by ambition and spurred to action by his wife, Macbeth murders King Duncan and takes the Scottish throne for himself.
He is then wracked with guilt and paranoia.
Forced to commit more and more murders to protect himself from enmity and suspicion, he soon becomes a tyrannical ruler.
The bloodbath and consequent civil war swiftly take Macbeth and Lady Macbeth into the realms of madness and death.Shakespeare's source for the story is the account of Macbeth, King of Scotland, Macduff, and Duncan in Holinshed's Chronicles (1587), a history of England, Scotland, and Ireland familiar to Shakespeare and his contemporaries, although the events in the play differ extensively from the history of the real Macbeth.
The events of the tragedy are usually associated with the execution of Henry Garnet for complicity in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605.
In the backstage world of theatre, some believe that the play is cursed, and will not mention its title aloud, referring to it instead as "The Scottish Play".
The play has attracted some of the most renowned actors to the roles of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth, and has been adapted to film, television, opera, novels, comics, and other media.Amid thunder and lightning, Three Witches decide that their next meeting will be with Macbeth.
In the following scene, a wounded sergeant reports to King Duncan of Scotland that his generals Banquo and Macbeth, the Thane of Glamis, have just defeated the allied forces of Norway and Ireland, who were led by the traitorous Macdonwald and the Thane of Cawdor.
Macbeth, the King's kinsman, is praised for his bravery and fighting prowess.In the following scene, Macbeth and Banquo discuss the weather and their victory.
As they wander onto a heath, the Three Witches enter and greet them with prophecies.
Though Banquo challenges them first, they address Macbeth, hailing him as "Thane of Glamis", "Thane of Cawdor", and that he will "be King hereafter".
Macbeth appears to be stunned to silence.
When Banquo asks of his own fortunes, the witches respond that he will father a line of kings, though he himself will not be one.
While the two men wonder at these pronouncements, the witches vanish, and another thane, Ross, arrives and informs Macbeth of his newly bestowed title: Thane of Cawdor.
The first prophecy is thus fulfilled, and Macbeth, previously sceptical, immediately begins to harbour ambitions of becoming king.King Duncan welcomes and praises Macbeth and Banquo, and Duncan declares that he will spend the night at Macbeth's castle at Inverness; Duncan also names his son Malcolm as his heir.
Macbeth sends a message ahead to his wife, Lady Macbeth, telling her about the witches' prophecies.
Lady Macbeth suffers none of her husband's uncertainty and wishes him to murder Duncan in order to obtain kingship.
When Macbeth arrives at Inverness, she overrides all of her husband's objections by challenging his manhood and successfully persuades him to kill the king that very night.
He and Lady Macbeth plan to get Duncan's two chamberlains drunk so that they will black out; the next morning they will frame the chamberlains for the murder.
Since the chamberlains would remember nothing whatsoever, they would be blamed for the deed.While Duncan is asleep, Macbeth stabs him, despite his doubts and a number of supernatural portents, including a hallucination of a bloody dagger.
He is so shaken that Lady Macbeth has to take charge.
In accordance with her plan, she frames Duncan's sleeping servants for the murder by placing bloody daggers on them.
Early the next morning, Lennox, a Scottish nobleman, and Macduff, the loyal Thane of Fife, arrive.
A porter opens the gate and Macbeth leads them to the king's chamber, where Macduff discovers Duncan's body.
Macbeth murders the guards to prevent them from professing their innocence, but claims he did so in a fit of anger over their misdeeds.
Duncan's sons Malcolm and Donalbain flee to England and Ireland, respectively, fearing that whoever killed Duncan desires their demise as well.
The rightful heirs' flight makes them suspects and Macbeth assumes the throne as the new King of Scotland as a kinsman of the dead king.
Banquo reveals this to the audience, and while sceptical of the new King Macbeth, he remembers the witches' prophecy about how his own descendants would inherit the throne; this makes him suspicious of Macbeth.Despite his success, Macbeth, also aware of this part of the prophecy, remains uneasy.
Macbeth invites Banquo to a royal banquet, where he discovers that Banquo and his young son, Fleance, will be riding out that night.
Fearing Banquo's suspicions, Macbeth arranges to have him murdered, by hiring two men to kill them, later sending a third murderer, presumably to ensure that the deed is completed.
The assassins succeed in killing Banquo, but Fleance escapes.
Macbeth becomes furious: he fears that his power remains insecure as long as an heir of Banquo remains alive.At the banquet, Macbeth invites his lords and Lady Macbeth to a night of drinking and merriment.
Banquo's ghost enters and sits in Macbeth's place.
Macbeth raves fearfully, startling his guests, as the ghost is visible only to him.
The others panic at the sight of Macbeth raging at an empty chair, until a desperate Lady Macbeth tells them that her husband is merely afflicted with a familiar and harmless malady.
The ghost departs and returns once more, causing the same riotous anger and fear in Macbeth.
This time, Lady Macbeth tells the visitors to leave, and they do so.
At the end Hecate scolds the three weird sisters for helping Macbeth, especially without consulting her.
Hecate instructs the Witches to give Macbeth false security.
Note that some scholars believe the Hecate scene was added in later.Macbeth, disturbed, visits the three witches once more and asks them to reveal the truth of their prophecies to him.
To answer his questions, they summon horrible apparitions, each of which offers predictions and further prophecies to put Macbeth's fears at rest.
First, they conjure an armoured head, which tells him to beware of Macduff (IV.i.72).
Second, a bloody child tells him that no one born of a woman will be able to harm him.
Thirdly, a crowned child holding a tree states that Macbeth will be safe until Great Birnam Wood comes to Dunsinane Hill.
