Romeo and Juliet is a tragedy written by William Shakespeare early in his career about the romance between two Italian youths from feuding families.
It was among Shakespeare's most popular plays during his lifetime and, along with Hamlet, is one of his most frequently performed plays.
Today, the title characters are regarded as archetypal young lovers.Romeo and Juliet belongs to a tradition of tragic romances stretching back to antiquity.
The plot is based on an Italian tale written by Matteo Bandello and translated into verse as The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet by Arthur Brooke in 1562 and retold in prose in Palace of Pleasure by William Painter in 1567.
Shakespeare borrowed heavily from both but expanded the plot by developing a number of supporting characters, particularly Mercutio and Paris.
Believed to have been written between 1591 and 1595, the play was first published in a quarto version in 1597.
The text of the first quarto version was of poor quality, however, and later editions corrected the text to conform more closely with Shakespeare's original.Shakespeare's use of poetic dramatic structure (including effects such as switching between comedy and tragedy to heighten tension, the expansion of minor characters, and numerous sub-plots to embellish the story) has been praised as an early sign of his dramatic skill.
The play ascribes different poetic forms to different characters, sometimes changing the form as the character develops.
Romeo, for example, grows more adept at the sonnet over the course of the play.Romeo and Juliet has been adapted numerous times for stage, film, musical, and opera venues.
During the English Restoration, it was revived and heavily revised by William Davenant.
David Garrick's 18th-century version also modified several scenes, removing material then considered indecent, and Georg Benda's Romeo und Julie omitted much of the action and used a happy ending.
Performances in the 19th century, including Charlotte Cushman's, restored the original text and focused on greater realism.
John Gielgud's 1935 version kept very close to Shakespeare's text and used Elizabethan costumes and staging to enhance the drama.
In the 20th and into the 21st century, the play has been adapted in versions as diverse as George Cukor's 1936 film Romeo and Juliet, Franco Zeffirelli's 1968 film Romeo and Juliet, Baz Luhrmann's 1996 film Romeo + Juliet, and most recently, Carlo Carlei's 2013 film Romeo and Juliet.The play, set in Verona, Italy, begins with a street brawl between Montague and Capulet servants who, like the masters they serve, are sworn enemies.
Prince Escalus of Verona intervenes and declares that further breach of the peace will be punishable by death.
Later, Count Paris talks to Capulet about marrying his daughter Juliet, but Capulet asks Paris to wait another two years and invites him to attend a planned Capulet ball.
Lady Capulet and Juliet's Nurse try to persuade Juliet to accept Paris's courtship.Meanwhile, Benvolio talks with his cousin Romeo, Montague's son, about Romeo's recent depression.
Benvolio discovers that it stems from unrequited infatuation for a girl named Rosaline, one of Capulet's nieces.
Persuaded by Benvolio and Mercutio, Romeo attends the ball at the Capulet house in hopes of meeting Rosaline.
However, Romeo instead meets and falls in love with Juliet.
Juliet's cousin, Tybalt, is enraged at Romeo for sneaking into the ball but is only stopped from killing Romeo by Juliet's father, who does not wish to shed blood in his house.
After the ball, in what is now famously known as the "balcony scene", Romeo sneaks into the Capulet orchard and overhears Juliet at her window vowing her love to him in spite of her family's hatred of the Montagues.
Romeo makes himself known to her, and they agree to be married.
With the help of Friar Laurence, who hopes to reconcile the two families through their children's union, they are secretly married the next day.Tybalt, meanwhile, still incensed that Romeo had sneaked into the Capulet ball, challenges him to a duel.
Romeo, now considering Tybalt his kinsman, refuses to fight.
Mercutio is offended by Tybalt's insolence, as well as Romeo's "vile submission",  and accepts the duel on Romeo's behalf.
Mercutio is fatally wounded when Romeo attempts to break up the fight, and declares a curse upon both households before he dies.
("A plague o' both your houses!")
Grief-stricken and racked with guilt, Romeo confronts and slays Tybalt.Benvolio argues that Romeo has justly executed Tybalt for the murder of Mercutio.
The Prince, now having lost a kinsman in the warring families' feud, exiles Romeo from Verona, under penalty of death if he ever returns.
Romeo secretly spends the night in Juliet's chamber, where they consummate their marriage.
Capulet, misinterpreting Juliet's grief, agrees to marry her to Count Paris and threatens to disown her when she refuses to become Paris's "joyful bride".
When she then pleads for the marriage to be delayed, her mother rejects her.Juliet visits Friar Laurence for help, and he offers her a potion that will put her into a deathlike coma or catalepsy for "two and forty hours".
The Friar promises to send a messenger to inform Romeo of the plan so that he can rejoin her when she awakens.
On the night before the wedding, she takes the drug and, when discovered apparently dead, she is laid in the family crypt.The messenger, however, does not reach Romeo and, instead, Romeo learns of Juliet's apparent death from his servant, Balthasar.
Heartbroken, Romeo buys poison from an apothecary and goes to the Capulet crypt.
He encounters Paris who has come to mourn Juliet privately.
Believing Romeo to be a vandal, Paris confronts him and, in the ensuing battle, Romeo kills Paris.
Still believing Juliet to be dead, he drinks the poison.
Juliet then awakens and, discovering that Romeo is dead, stabs herself with his dagger and joins him in death.
The feuding families and the Prince meet at the tomb to find all three dead.
Friar Laurence recounts the story of the two "star-cross'd lovers", fulfilling the curse that Mercutio swore.
The families are reconciled by their children's deaths and agree to end their violent feud.
The play ends with the Prince's elegy for the lovers: "For never was a story of more woe / Than this of Juliet and her Romeo."
Romeo and Juliet borrows from a tradition of tragic love stories dating back to antiquity.
One of these is Pyramus and Thisbe, from Ovid's Metamorphoses, which contains parallels to Shakespeare's story: the lovers' parents despise each other, and Pyramus falsely believes his lover Thisbe is dead.
The Ephesiaca of Xenophon of Ephesus, written in the 3rd century, also contains several similarities to the play, including the separation of the lovers, and a potion that induces a deathlike sleep.
One of the earliest references to the names Montague and Capulet is from Dante's Divine Comedy, who mentions the Montecchi (Montagues) and the Cappelletti (Capulets) in canto six of Purgatorio: Come and see, you who are negligent,Montagues and Capulets, Monaldi and FilippeschiOne lot already grieving, the other in fear.
However, the reference is part of a polemic against the moral decay of Florence, Lombardy, and the Italian Peninsula as a whole; Dante, through his characters, chastises German King Albert I for neglecting his responsibilities towards Italy ("you who are negligent"), and successive popes for their encroachment from purely spiritual affairs, thus leading to a climate of incessant bickering and warfare between rival political parties in Lombardy.
History records the name of the family Montague as being lent to such a political party in Verona, but that of the Capulets as from a Cremonese family, both of whom play out their conflict in Lombardy as a whole rather than within the confines of Verona.
