The Inca Empire (also known as the Incan Empire and the Inka Empire), called Tawantinsuyu by its subjects, (Quechua for the "Realm of the Four Parts"[a]) was the largest empire in pre-Columbian America.
The administrative, political, and military center of the empire was in the city of Cusco.
The Inca civilization arose from the Peruvian highlands sometime in the early 13th century.
The Spanish began the conquest of the Inca Empire in 1532 and by 1572, the last Inca state was fully conquered.From 1438 to 1533, the Incas incorporated a large portion of western South America, centered on the Andean Mountains, using conquest and peaceful assimilation, among other methods.
At its largest, the empire joined modern-day Peru, what are now western Ecuador, western and south central Bolivia, northwest Argentina, the southwesternmost tip of Colombia and a large portion of modern-day Chile into a state comparable to the historical empires of Eurasia.
Its official language was Quechua.
The Inca Empire was unique in that it lacked many of the features associated with civilization in the Old World.
Anthropologist Gordon McEwan wrote that the Incas were able to construct "one of the greatest imperial states in human history" without the use of the wheel, draft animals, knowledge of iron or steel, or even a system of writing.
Notable features of the Inca Empire included its monumental architecture, especially stonework, extensive road network reaching all corners of the empire, finely-woven textiles, use of knotted strings (quipu) for record keeping and communication, agricultural innovations and production in a difficult environment, and the organization and management fostered or imposed on its people and their labor.The Inca Empire functioned largely without money and without markets.
Instead, exchange of goods and services was based on reciprocity between individuals and among individuals, groups, and Inca rulers.
"Taxes" consisted of a labour obligation of a person to the Empire.
The Inca rulers (who theoretically owned all the means of production) reciprocated by granting access to land and goods and providing food and drink in celebratory feasts for their subjects.
Many local forms of worship persisted in the empire, most of them concerning local sacred Huacas, but the Inca leadership encouraged the sun worship of Inti – their sun god – and imposed its sovereignty above other cults such as that of Pachamama.
The Incas considered their king, the Sapa Inca, to be the "son of the sun".
The Incan economy is a subject of scholarly debate.
Darrell E. La Lone, in his work The Inca as a Nonmarket Economy, noted that scholars have described it as "feudal, slave, [or] socialist," as well as "a system based on reciprocity and redistribution; a system with markets and commerce; or an Asiatic mode of production."
The Inca referred to their empire as Tawantinsuyu,  "the four suyu".
In Quechua, tawa is four and -ntin is a suffix naming a group, so that a tawantin is a quartet, a group of four things taken together, in this case the four suyu ("regions" or "provinces") whose corners met at the capital.
The four suyu were: Chinchaysuyu (north), Antisuyu (east; the Amazon jungle), Qullasuyu (south) and Kuntisuyu (west).
The name Tawantinsuyu was, therefore, a descriptive term indicating a union of provinces.
The Spanish transliterated the name as Tahuatinsuyo or Tahuatinsuyu.While the term Inka nowaydays is translated as "ruler" or "lord" in Quechua, this term does not simply refer to the "King" of the Tawantinsuyu or Sapa Inka but also to the Inca nobles, and some theorize its meaning could be broader.
In that sense, the Inca nobles were a small percentage of the total population of the empire, probably numbering only 15,000 to 40,000, but ruling a population of around 10 million people.
When the Spanish arrived to the Empire of the Incas they gave the name "Peru" to what the natives knew as Tawantinsuyu.
The name "Inca Empire" (Imperio de los Incas) originated from the Chronicles of the 16th Century.
The Inca Empire was the last chapter of thousands of years of Andean civilizations.
The Andean civilization is one of at least five civilizations in the world deemed by scholars to be "pristine."
The concept of a "pristine" civilization refers to a civilization that has developed independently from external influences and is not a derivative of other civilizations.
The Inca Empire was preceded by two large-scale empires in the Andes: the Tiwanaku (c. 300–1100 AD), based around Lake Titicaca, and the Wari or Huari (c. 600–1100 AD), centered near the city of Ayacucho.
The Wari occupied the Cuzco area for about 400 years.
Thus, many of the characteristics of the Inca Empire derived from earlier multi-ethnic and expansive Andean cultures.
To those earlier civilizations may be owed some of the accomplishments cited for the Inca Empire: "thousands of miles of roads and dozens of large administrative centers with elaborate stone construction...terraced mountainsides and filled in valleys", and the production of "vast quantities of goods".
Carl Troll has argued that the development of the Inca state in the central Andes was aided by conditions that allow for the elaboration of the staple food chuño.
Chuño, which can be stored for long periods, is made of potato dried at the freezing temperatures that are common at nighttime in the southern Peruvian highlands.
Such a link between the Inca state and chuño has been questioned, as other crops such as maize can also be dried with only sunlight.
Troll also argued that llamas, the Incas' pack animal, can be found in their largest numbers in this very same region.
The maximum extent of the Inca Empire roughly coincided with the distribution of llamas and alpacas, the only large domesticated animals in Pre-Hispanic America.
As a third point Troll pointed out irrigation technology as advantageous to Inca state-building.
While Troll theorized concerning environmental influences on the Inca Empire, he opposed environmental determinism, arguing that culture lay at the core of the Inca civilization.
The Inca people were a pastoral tribe in the Cusco area around the 12th century.
Indigenous Peruvian oral history tells an origin story of three caves.
The center cave at Tampu T'uqu (Tambo Tocco) was named Qhapaq T'uqu ("principal niche", also spelled Capac Tocco).
The other caves were Maras T'uqu (Maras Tocco) and Sutiq T'uqu (Sutic Tocco).
Four brothers and four sisters stepped out of the middle cave.
They were: Ayar Manco, Ayar Cachi, Ayar Awqa (Ayar Auca) and Ayar Uchu; and Mama Ocllo, Mama Raua, Mama Huaco and Mama Qura (Mama Cora).
Out of the side caves came the people who were to be the ancestors of all the Inca clans.Ayar Manco carried a magic staff made of the finest gold.
Where this staff landed, the people would live.
They traveled for a long time.
On the way, Ayar Cachi boasted about his strength and power.
His siblings tricked him into returning to the cave to get a sacred llama.
When he went into the cave, they trapped him inside to get rid of him.Ayar Uchu decided to stay on the top of the cave to look over the Inca people.
