Harry Potter is a series of seven fantasy novels written by British author J. K. Rowling.
The novels chronicle the lives of a young wizard, Harry Potter, and his friends Hermione Granger and Ron Weasley, all of whom are students at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.
The main story arc concerns Harry's conflict with Lord Voldemort, a dark wizard who intends to become immortal, overthrow the wizard governing body known as the Ministry of Magic and subjugate all wizards and Muggles (non-magical people).The series was originally published in English by Bloomsbury in the United Kingdom and Scholastic Press in the United States.
All versions around the world are printed by Grafica Veneta in Italy.
A series of many genres, including fantasy, drama, coming-of-age fiction, and the British school story (which includes elements of mystery, thriller, adventure, horror, and romance), the world of Harry Potter explores numerous themes and includes many cultural meanings and references.
According to Rowling, the main theme is death.
Other major themes in the series include prejudice, corruption, and madness.
Since the release of the first novel, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, on 26 June 1997, the books have found immense popularity, positive reviews, and commercial success worldwide.
They have attracted a wide adult audience as well as younger readers and are widely considered cornerstones of modern literature.
As of February 2023[update], the books have sold more than 600 million copies worldwide, making them the best-selling book series in history, and have been available in 85 languages.
The last four books consecutively set records as the fastest-selling books in history, with the final instalment selling roughly 2.7 million copies in the United Kingdom and 8.3 million copies in the United States within twenty-four hours of its release.The original seven books were adapted into an eight-part namesake film series by Warner Bros. Pictures.
In 2016, the total value of the Harry Potter franchise was estimated at $25 billion,  making Harry Potter one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time.
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child is a play based on a story co-written by Rowling.The success of the books and films has allowed the Harry Potter franchise to expand with numerous derivative works, a travelling exhibition that premiered in Chicago in 2009, a studio tour in London that opened in 2012, a digital platform on which J. K. Rowling updates the series with new information and insight, and a pentalogy of spin-off films premiering in November 2016 with Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, among many other developments.
Themed attractions, collectively known as The Wizarding World of Harry Potter, have been built at several Universal Destinations & Experiences amusement parks around the world.The series follows the life of a boy named Harry Potter.
In the first book, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, Harry lives in a cupboard under the stairs in the house of the Dursleys, his aunt, uncle and cousin, Dudley.
The Dursleys consider themselves perfectly normal, but at the age of 11, Harry discovers that he is a wizard.
He meets a half-giant named Hagrid who invites him to attend the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.
Harry learns that as a baby, his parents were murdered by the dark wizard Lord Voldemort.
When Voldemort attempted to kill Harry, his curse rebounded and Harry survived with a lightning-shaped scar on his forehead.Harry becomes a student at Hogwarts and is sorted into Gryffindor House.
He gains the friendship of Ron Weasley, a member of a large but poor wizarding family, and Hermione Granger, a witch of non-magical, or Muggle, parentage.
Harry encounters the school's potions master, Severus Snape, who displays a dislike for him; the rich pure-blood Draco Malfoy whom he develops an enmity with; and the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher, Quirinus Quirrell, who turns out to be allied with Lord Voldemort.
The first book concludes with Harry's confrontation with Voldemort, who, in his quest to regain a body, yearns to gain the power of the Philosopher's Stone, a substance that bestows everlasting life.Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets describes Harry's second year at Hogwarts.
Students are attacked and petrified by an unknown creature; wizards of Muggle parentage are the primary targets.
The attacks appear related to the Chamber of Secrets, a fifty-year-old mystery at the school.
Harry discovers an ability to speak the snake language Parseltongue, which he learns is rare and associated with the Dark Arts.
When Hermione is attacked, Harry and Ron uncover the chamber's secrets and enter it.
Harry discovers that the chamber was opened by Ron's younger sister, Ginny Weasley, who was possessed by an old diary in her belongings.
The memory of Tom Marvolo Riddle, Voldemort's younger self, resided inside the diary and unleashed the basilisk, an ancient monster that kills those who make direct eye contact.
Harry draws the Sword of Gryffindor from the Sorting Hat, slays the basilisk and destroys the diary.In the third novel, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Harry learns that he is targeted by Sirius Black, an escaped convict who allegedly assisted in his parents' murder.
As Harry struggles with his reaction to the dementors – creatures guarding the school that feed on despair – he reaches out to Remus Lupin, a new professor who teaches him the Patronus charm.
On a windy night, Ron is dragged by a black dog into the Shrieking Shack; Harry and Hermione follow.
The dog is revealed to be Sirius Black.
Lupin enters the shack and explains that Black was James Potter's best friend; he was framed by another friend of James', Peter Pettigrew, who hides as Ron's pet rat, Scabbers.
As the full moon rises, Lupin transforms into a werewolf and bounds away; the group chase after him but are surrounded by dementors.
They are saved by a mysterious figure who casts a stag Patronus.
This is later revealed to be a future version of Harry, who traveled back in time with Hermione using the Time Turner.
The duo help Sirius escape on a Hippogriff.In Harry's fourth year of school (detailed in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire), he is unwillingly entered in the Triwizard Tournament, a contest between schools of witchcraft and wizardry.
Harry is Hogwarts' second participant after Cedric Diggory, an unusual occurrence that causes his friends to distance themselves from him.
He competes against schools Beauxbatons and Durmstrang with the help of the new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor, Alastor "Mad-Eye" Moody.
Harry claims the Triwizard Cup with Cedric, but in doing so is teleported to a graveyard where Voldemort's supporters convene.
Moody reveals himself be to Barty Crouch, Jr, a Death Eater.
Harry manages to escape, but Cedric is killed and Voldemort is resurrected using Harry's blood.In the fifth book, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, the Ministry of Magic refuses to believe that Voldemort has returned.
Dumbledore re-activates the Order of the Phoenix, a secret society to counter Voldemort; meanwhile, the Ministry appoints Dolores Umbridge as the High Inquisitor of Hogwarts.
Umbridge bans the Defense Against the Dark Arts; in response, Hermione and Ron form "Dumbledore's Army", a secret group where Harry teaches what Umbridge forbids.
Harry is punished for disobeying Umbridge, and dreams of a dark corridor in the Ministry of Magic.
Near the end of the book, Harry falsely dreams of Sirius being tortured; he races to the Ministry where he faces Death Eaters.
The Order of the Phoenix saves the teenagers' lives, but Sirius is killed.
A prophecy concerning Harry and Voldemort is then revealed: one must die at the hands of the other.In the sixth book, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Snape teaches Defense Against the Dark Arts while Horace Slughorn becomes the Potions master.
Harry finds an old textbook with annotations by the Half-Blood Prince, due to which he achieves success in Potions class.
Harry also takes lessons with Dumbledore, viewing memories about the early life of Voldemort in a device called a Pensieve.
