In the Holy Land (1095–1291)Later Crusades (post-1291)Northern Crusades (1147–1410)Crusades against ChristiansPopular crusadesThe Crusades were a series of religious wars initiated, supported, and sometimes directed by the Latin Church in the medieval period.
The best known of these military expeditions are those to the Holy Land in the period between 1095 and 1291 that were intended to conquer Jerusalem and its surrounding area from Muslim rule.
Beginning with the First Crusade, which resulted in the conquest of Jerusalem in 1099, dozens of military campaigns were organised, providing a focal point of European history for centuries.
Crusading declined rapidly after the 15th century.In 1095, Pope Urban II proclaimed the first expedition at the Council of Clermont.
He encouraged military support for Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos against the Seljuk Turks and called for an armed pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
Across all social strata in western Europe there was an enthusiastic response.
Participants came from all over Europe and had a variety of motivations, including religious salvation, satisfying feudal obligations, opportunities for renown, and economic or political advantage.
Later expeditions were conducted by generally more organized armies, sometimes led by a king.
All were granted papal indulgences.
Initial successes established four Crusader states: the County of Edessa; the Principality of Antioch; the Kingdom of Jerusalem; and the County of Tripoli.
A European presence remained in the region in some form until the fall of Acre in 1291.
After this, no further large military campaigns were organised.Other church-sanctioned campaigns include crusades against Christians not obeying papal rulings, against the Ottoman Empire, and for political reasons.
The struggle between Christians and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula was proclaimed a crusade in 1123, but eventually became better known as the Reconquista, and only ended in 1492 with the fall of the Muslim Emirate of Granada.
From 1147, campaigns in Northern Europe against pagan tribes were considered crusades.
In 1199, Pope Innocent III began the practice of proclaiming crusades against apostate Christian communities, called heretics by the Latin Church.
Crusades were called against the Cathars in Languedoc and against Bosnia; against the Waldensians in Savoy and the Hussites in Bohemia; and in response to the rise of the Ottoman Empire.
Unsanctioned by the church, there were also several popular Crusades.Accordng to modern historiography the term "crusade" first referred to military expeditions undertaken by European Christians in the 11th, 12th, and 13th centuries to the Holy Land.
The conflicts to which the term is applied has been extended to include other campaigns initiated, supported and sometimes directed by the Roman Catholic Church against pagans, heretics or for alleged religious ends.
These differed from other Christian religious wars in that they were considered a penitential exercise, and so earned participants forgiveness for all confessed sins.
What constituted a "crusade" has been understood in diverse ways, particularly regarding the early Crusades, and the definition remains a matter of debate among contemporary historians.
The meaning of a "crusade" is generally viewed in one of four ways.
Traditionalists view Crusades as only those to the Holy Land from 1095–1291.
Pluralists view Crusades are military expeditions that enjoyed papal endorsement, including those to the Holy Land before and after 1291, to Northern Europe and Iberia, and against Christians.
Popularists focus on the popular groundswells of religious fervour.
Generalists focus on the basic phenomenon of Latin holy wars.
Most modern Crusades historians consider a combination of pluralism and popularism, which is also the focus of this article.
At the time of the First Crusade, iter, "journey", and peregrinatio, "pilgrimage" were used for the campaign.
Crusader terminology remained largely indistinguishable from that of Christian pilgrimage during the 12th century.
A specific term for a crusader in the form of crucesignatus—"one signed by the cross"—, however, emerged in the early 12th century.
This led to the French croisade—the way of the cross.
By the mid 13th century the cross became the major descriptor of the crusades with crux transmarina—"the cross overseas"—used for crusades in the eastern Mediterranean, and crux cismarina—"the cross this side of the sea"—for those in Europe.
The use of croiserie, "crusade" in Middle English can be dated to c.1300, but the modern English "crusade" dates to the early 1700s.
The Arabic word for struggle or contest, particularly one for the propagation of Islam—jihād—was used for a religious war of Muslims against unbelievers, and it was believed by some Muslims that the Quran and Hadith made this a duty.
"Franks" and "Latins" were used by the peoples of the Near East during the crusades for western Europeans, distinguishing them from the Byzantine Christians who were known as "Greeks".
"Saracen" was used for an Arab Muslim, derived from a Greek and Roman name for the nomadic peoples of the Syro-Arabian desert.
Crusader sources used the term "Syrians" to describe Arabic speaking Christians who were members of the Greek Orthodox Church, and "Jacobites" for those who were members of the Syrian Orthodox Church.
The Crusader states of Syria and Palestine were known as the "Outremer" from the French outre-mer, or "the land beyond the sea".
The Crusades to the Holy Land are the best known of the religious wars associated with the term, beginning in 1095 and lasting some two centuries.
These Crusades began with the fervent desire to wrest the Holy Land from the Muslims, and ran through eight major numbered crusades and dozens of minor crusades over the period.
The Arab-Byzantine wars from 629 to the 1050s resulted in the conquest of the Levant and Egypt by the Muslim Rashidun Caliphate.
Jerusalem was captured after a half-year siege in 637.
In 1025, the Byzantine emperor Basil II was able to extend the empire's territorial recovery to its furthest extent in 1025, with frontiers stretching east to Iran.
The empire's relationships with its Islamic neighbours were no more quarrelsome than its relationships with the Western Christians, after the East-West Schism of 1054.
The political situation in the Middle East was changed by waves of Turkic migration – in particular, the arrival of the Seljuk Turks in the 10th century.
Previously a minor ruling clan from Transoxiana, they were recent converts to Islam who migrated into Persia.
They conquered Iran, Iraq and the Near East to the Seljuk Empire.
Byzantium's attempted confrontation in 1071 to suppress the Seljuks' sporadic raiding led to the defeat at the Battle of Manzikert, eventually the occupation of most of the Anatolian peninsula.
In the same year, Jerusalem was taken from the Fatimids by the Turkish warlord Atsiz, who seized most of Syria and Palestine throughout the Middle East.
The Seljuk hold on the city resulted in pilgrims reporting difficulties and the oppression of Christians.
In 1074, just three years after Manzikert and the Seljuk takeover of Jerusalem, Gregory VII began planning to launch a military campaign for the liberation of the Holy Land.
