The Great Depression (1929–1939) was an economic shock that impacted most countries across the world.
It was a period of economic depression that became evident after a major fall in stock prices in the United States.
The economic contagion began around September and led to the Wall Street stock market crash of October 24 (Black Thursday).
It was the longest, deepest, and most widespread depression of the 20th century.
Between 1929 and 1932, worldwide gross domestic product (GDP) fell by an estimated 15%.
By comparison, worldwide GDP fell by less than 1% from 2008 to 2009 during the Great Recession.
Some economies started to recover by the mid-1930s.
However, in many countries,[specify] the negative effects of the Great Depression lasted until the beginning of World War II.
[page needed] Devastating effects were seen in both rich and poor countries with falling personal income, prices, tax revenues, and profits.
International trade fell by more than 50%, unemployment in the U.S. rose to 23% and in some countries rose as high as 33%.
Cities around the world were hit hard, especially those dependent on heavy industry.
Construction was virtually halted in many countries.
Farming communities and rural areas suffered as crop prices fell by about 60%.
Faced with plummeting demand and few job alternatives, areas dependent on primary sector industries suffered the most.
Economic historians usually consider the catalyst of the Great Depression to be the sudden devastating collapse of U.S. stock market prices, starting on October 24, 1929.
However, some dispute this conclusion, seeing the stock crash less as a cause of the Depression and more as a symptom of the rising nervousness of investors partly due to gradual price declines caused by falling sales of consumer goods (as a result of overproduction because of new production techniques, falling exports and income inequality, among other factors) that had already been underway as part of a gradual Depression.
After the Wall Street Crash of 1929, where the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped from 381 to 198 over the course of two months, optimism persisted for some time.
The stock market rose in early 1930, with the Dow returning to 294 (pre-depression levels) in April 1930, before steadily declining for years, to a low of 41 in 1932.
At the beginning, governments and businesses spent more in the first half of 1930 than in the corresponding period of the previous year.
On the other hand, consumers, many of whom suffered severe losses in the stock market the previous year, cut  expenditures by 10%.
In addition, beginning in the mid-1930s, a severe drought ravaged the agricultural heartland of the U.S. Interest rates dropped to low levels by mid-1930, but expected deflation and the continuing reluctance of people to borrow meant that consumer spending and investment remained low.
By May 1930, automobile sales declined to below the levels of 1928.
Prices, in general, began to decline, although wages held steady in 1930.
Then a deflationary spiral started in 1931.
Farmers faced a worse outlook; declining crop prices and a Great Plains drought crippled their economic outlook.
At its peak, the Great Depression saw nearly 10% of all Great Plains farms change hands despite federal assistance.
The decline in the U.S. economy was the factor that pulled down most other countries at first; then, internal weaknesses or strengths in each country made conditions worse or better.
[citation needed] Frantic attempts by individual countries to shore up their economies through protectionist policies – such as the 1930 U.S. Smoot–Hawley Tariff Act and retaliatory tariffs in other countries – exacerbated the collapse in global trade, contributing to the depression.
By 1933, the economic decline pushed world trade to one third of its level compared to four years earlier.
Because the Great Depression began in the United States and then spread around the world, the origins of the Great Depression are examined in the context of the United States economy.
In the aftermath of World War I, the Roaring Twenties had brought considerable wealth to the United States and Western Europe.
The year 1929 dawned with considerable economic progress in the American economy.
A small stock crash occurred on March 25, 1929, but the crash was stabilized.
Despite signs of economic trouble, the market continued to improve through September.
Stock prices began to slump in September, and were volatile at the end of September.
A large sell-off of stocks began in mid-October.
Finally, on October 24, Black Thursday, the American stock market crashed 11% at the opening bell.
Actions to stabilize the market failed, and on October 28, Black Monday, the market crashed another 12%.
The panic peaked the next day on Black Tuesday, when the market saw another 11% drop.
Thousands of investors were ruined, and billions of dollars had been lost; many stocks could not be sold at any price.
The market recovered 12% on Wednesday, but the damage had been done.
Though the market recovered from November 14, until April 17, 1930, the market entered a prolonged slump.
From April 17, 1930, until July 8, 1932, the market lost 89% of its value.
Despite the crash, the worst of the crisis did not reverberate around the world until after 1929.
The crisis hit panic levels again in December 1930, with a bank run on the Bank of United States (privately run, no relation to the government).
Unable to pay out to all of its creditors, the bank failed.
Among the 608 American banks that closed in November and December 1930, the Bank of United States accounted for a third of the total $550 million deposits lost and, with its closure, bank failures reached a critical mass.
The Smoot–Hawley Tariff Act was passed in the United States on June 17, 1930, having been proposed the year prior.
Ostensibly aimed at protecting the American economy as the Depression began to take root, it backfired enormously and may have even caused the Depression.
The consensus view among economists and economic historians (including Keynesians, Monetarists and Austrian economists) is that the passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff exacerbated the Great Depression,  although there is disagreement as to how much.
