Second Sino-Japanese WarThe atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were the detonation of two atomic bombs over the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on 6 and 9 August 1945 by the United States.
The two bombings killed between 129,000 and 226,000 people, most of whom were civilians, and remain the only use of nuclear weapons in an armed conflict.
Japan surrendered to the Allies on 15 August, six days after the bombing of Nagasaki and the Soviet Union's declaration of war against Japan.
The Japanese government signed the instrument of surrender on 2 September, effectively ending the war.
In the final year of World War II, the Allies prepared for a costly invasion of the Japanese mainland.
This undertaking was preceded by a conventional and firebombing campaign that devastated 64 Japanese cities.
The war in the European theatre concluded when Germany surrendered on 8 May 1945, and the Allies turned their full attention to the Pacific War.
By July 1945, the Allies' Manhattan Project had produced two types of atomic bombs: "Fat Man", a plutonium implosion-type nuclear weapon; and "Little Boy", an enriched uranium gun-type fission weapon.
The 509th Composite Group of the United States Army Air Forces was trained and equipped with the specialized Silverplate version of the Boeing B-29 Superfortress, and deployed to Tinian in the Mariana Islands.
The Allies called for the unconditional surrender of the Imperial Japanese armed forces in the Potsdam Declaration on 26 July 1945, the alternative being "prompt and utter destruction".
The Japanese government ignored the ultimatum.The consent of the United Kingdom was obtained for the bombing, as was required by the Quebec Agreement, and orders were issued on 25 July by General Thomas Handy, the acting Chief of Staff of the United States Army, for atomic bombs to be used against Hiroshima, Kokura, Niigata, and Nagasaki.
These targets were chosen because they were large urban areas that also held militarily significant facilities.
On 6 August, a Little Boy was dropped on Hiroshima, to which Prime Minister Suzuki reiterated the Japanese government's commitment to ignore the Allies' demands and fight on.
Three days later, a Fat Man was dropped on Nagasaki.
Over the next two to four months, the effects of the atomic bombings killed between 90,000 and 146,000 people in Hiroshima and 60,000 and 80,000 people in Nagasaki; roughly half occurred on the first day.
For months afterward, many people continued to die from the effects of burns, radiation sickness, and injuries, compounded by illness and malnutrition.
Though Hiroshima had a sizable military garrison, most of the dead were civilians.Japan surrendered to the Allies on 15 August, six days after the Soviet Union's declaration of war and the bombing of Nagasaki.
The Japanese government signed the instrument of surrender on 2 September, effectively ending the war.
Scholars have extensively studied the effects of the bombings on the social and political character of subsequent world history and popular culture, and there is still much debate concerning the ethical and legal justification for the bombings.
Supporters claim that the atomic bombings were necessary to bring an end to the war with minimal American casualties; critics believe that the bombings were unnecessary and a war crime, and highlight the moral and ethical implications of the intentional nuclear attack on civilians.In 1945, the Pacific War between the Empire of Japan and the Allies entered its fourth year.
Most Japanese military units fought fiercely, ensuring that the Allied victory would come at an enormous cost.
The 1.25 million battle casualties incurred in total by the United States in World War II included both military personnel killed in action and wounded in action.
Nearly one million of the casualties occurred during the last year of the war, from June 1944 to June 1945.
In December 1944, American battle casualties hit an all-time monthly high of 88,000 as a result of the German Ardennes Offensive.
America's reserves of manpower were running out.
Deferments for groups such as agricultural workers were tightened, and there was consideration of drafting women.
At the same time, the public was becoming war-weary, and demanding that long-serving servicemen be sent home.
In the Pacific, the Allies returned to the Philippines,  recaptured Burma,  and invaded Borneo.
Offensives were undertaken to reduce the Japanese forces remaining in Bougainville, New Guinea and the Philippines.
In April 1945, American forces landed on Okinawa, where heavy fighting continued until June.
Along the way, the ratio of Japanese to American casualties dropped from five to one in the Philippines to two to one on Okinawa.
Although some Japanese soldiers were taken prisoner, most fought until they were killed or committed suicide.
Nearly 99 percent of the 21,000 defenders of Iwo Jima were killed.
Of the 117,000 Okinawan and Japanese troops defending Okinawa in April to June 1945, 94 percent were killed;  7,401 Japanese soldiers surrendered, an unprecedentedly large number.
As the Allies advanced towards Japan, conditions became steadily worse for the Japanese people.
Japan's merchant fleet declined from 5,250,000 gross tons in 1941 to 1,560,000 tons in March 1945, and 557,000 tons in August 1945.
Lack of raw materials forced the Japanese war economy into a steep decline after the middle of 1944.
The civilian economy, which had slowly deteriorated throughout the war, reached disastrous levels by the middle of 1945.
The loss of shipping also affected the fishing fleet, and the 1945 catch was only 22 percent of that in 1941.
The 1945 rice harvest was the worst since 1909, and hunger and malnutrition became widespread.
U.S. industrial production was overwhelmingly superior to Japan's.
By 1943, the U.S. produced almost 100,000 aircraft a year, compared to Japan's production of 70,000 for the entire war.
In February 1945, Prince Fumimaro Konoe advised Emperor Hirohito that defeat was inevitable, and urged him to abdicate.
Even before the surrender of Nazi Germany on 8 May 1945, plans were underway for the largest operation of the Pacific War, Operation Downfall, the Allied invasion of Japan.
The operation had two parts: Operation Olympic and Operation Coronet.
Set to begin in October 1945, Olympic involved a series of landings by the U.S. Sixth Army intended to capture the southern third of the southernmost main Japanese island, Kyūshū.
Operation Olympic was to be followed in March 1946 by Operation Coronet, the capture of the Kantō Plain, near Tokyo on the main Japanese island of Honshū by the U.S. First, Eighth and Tenth Armies, as well as a Commonwealth Corps made up of Australian, British and Canadian divisions.
The target date was chosen to allow for Olympic to complete its objectives, for troops to be redeployed from Europe, and the Japanese winter to pass.
Japan's geography made this invasion plan obvious to the Japanese; they were able to predict the Allied invasion plans accurately and thus adjust their defensive plan, Operation Ketsugō, accordingly.
The Japanese planned an all-out defense of Kyūshū, with little left in reserve for any subsequent defense operations.
