Cardinal virtues Form of the Good Theory of forms Divisions of the soul Platonic love Platonic solids Plato (/ˈpleɪtoʊ/ PLAY-toe;  Greek: Πλάτων Plátōn; 428/427 or 424/423 – 348/347 BC) was an ancient Greek philosopher born in Athens during the Classical period in Ancient Greece.
In Athens, Plato founded the Academy, a philosophical school where he taught the philosophical doctrines that would later became known as Platonism.
Plato (or Platon) was a pen name derived from his nickname given to him by his wrestling coach – allegedly a reference to his physical broadness.
According to Alexander of Miletus quoted by Diogenes of Sinope his actual name was Aristocles, son of Ariston, of the deme Collytus (Collytus being a district of Athens).
Plato was an innovator of the written dialogue and dialectic forms in philosophy.
He raised problems for what later became all the major areas of both theoretical philosophy and practical philosophy.
His most famous contribution is the Theory of forms, where he presents a solution to the problem of universals.
He is also the namesake of Platonic love and the Platonic solids.His own most decisive philosophical influences are usually thought to have been, along with Socrates, the pre-Socratics Pythagoras, Heraclitus and Parmenides, although few of his predecessors' works remain extant and much of what we know about these figures today derives from Plato himself.
[a]Along with his teacher, Socrates, and his student, Aristotle, Plato is a central figure in the history of philosophy.
[b] Unlike the work of nearly all of his contemporaries, Plato's entire body of work is believed to have survived intact for over 2,400 years.
Although their popularity has fluctuated, Plato's works have consistently been read and studied.
Through Neoplatonism Plato also greatly influenced both Christian and Islamic philosophy (through e.g.
Al-Farabi).
In modern times, Alfred North Whitehead famously said: "the safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato."
Little is known about Plato's early life and education.
He belonged to an aristocratic and influential family.
The exact time and place of Plato's birth are unknown.
Based on ancient sources, most modern scholars believe that he was born in Athens or Aegina, between 428  and 423 BC.
Plato gives little biographical information about himself in his works, but often referred some of his relatives with a great degree of precision, including his brothers Adeimantus and Glaucon, who debate with Socrates in the Republic.
These and other references enable us to reconstruct Plato's family tree.
Plato may have travelled in Italy, Sicily, Egypt, and Cyrene,  but at the age of forty, Plato founded a school of philosophy in Athens, the Academy, on a plot of land in the Grove of Hecademus or Academus,  named after Academus, an Attic hero in Greek mythology.
The Academy operated until it was destroyed by Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 84 BC.
Many philosophers studied at the Academy, the most prominent one being Aristotle.
According to Diogenes Laërtius, throughout his later life, Plato became entangled with the politics of the city of Syracuse, where attempted to replace the tyrant Dionysius,  with Dionysius's brother-in-law, Dion of Syracuse, who Plato had recruited as one of his followers, but the tyrant himself turned against Plato.
After Dionysius's death, according to Plato's Seventh Letter, Dion requested Plato return to Syracuse to tutor Dionysius II, who seemed to accept Plato's teachings, but eventually became suspicious of their motives, expelling Dion and holding Plato against his will.
Eventually Plato left Syracuse.
and Dion would return to overthrow Dionysius and rule Syracuse, before being usurped by Calippus, a fellow disciple of Plato.
A variety of sources have given accounts of Plato's death.
One story, based on a mutilated manuscript,  suggests Plato died in his bed, whilst a young Thracian girl played the flute to him.
Another tradition suggests Plato died at a wedding feast.
The account is based on Diogenes Laërtius's reference to an account by Hermippus, a third-century Alexandrian.
According to Tertullian, Plato simply died in his sleep.
The fact that the philosopher in his maturity called himself Platon is indisputable, but the origin of this name remains mysterious.
Platon is a nickname from the adjective platýs (πλατύς) 'broad'.
Although Platon was a fairly common name (31 instances are known from Athens alone),  the name does not occur in Plato's known family line.
The sources of Diogenes Laërtius account for this by claiming that his wrestling coach, Ariston of Argos, dubbed him "broad" on account of his chest and shoulders, or that Plato derived his name from the breadth of his eloquence, or his wide forehead.
While recalling a moral lesson about frugal living Seneca mentions the meaning of Plato's name: "His very name was given him because of his broad chest."
According to Diogenes Laërtius,  his birth name was supposedly Aristocles (Ἀριστοκλῆς), meaning 'best reputation'.
[c], however modern scholars are divided on the reliability of this claim.
Plato never speaks in his own voice in his dialogues; every dialogue except the Laws features Socrates, although many dialogues, including the Timaeus and Statesman, feature him speaking only rarely.
Leo Strauss notes that Socrates' reputation for irony casts doubt on whether Plato's Socrates is expressing sincere beliefs.
Xenophon's Memorabilia and Aristophanes's The Clouds seem to present a somewhat different portrait of Socrates from the one Plato paints.
Aristotle attributes a different doctrine with respect to Forms to Plato and Socrates.
Aristotle suggests that Socrates' idea of forms can be discovered through investigation of the natural world, unlike Plato's Forms that exist beyond and outside the ordinary range of human understanding.
The Socratic problem concerns how to reconcile these various accounts.
The precise relationship between Plato and Socrates remains an area of contention among scholars.Although Socrates influenced Plato directly, the influence of Pythagoras, or in a broader sense, the Pythagoreans, such as Archytas also appears to have been significant.
Aristotle and Cicero both claimed that the philosophy of Plato closely followed the teachings of the Pythagoreans.
According to R. M. Hare, this influence consists of three points:Pythagoras held that all things are number, and the cosmos comes from numerical principles.
He introduced the concept of form as distinct from matter, and that the physical world is an imitation of an eternal mathematical world.
These ideas were very influential on Heraclitus, Parmenides and Plato.
