Steven Paul Jobs (February 24, 1955 – October 5, 2011) was an American business magnate, inventor, and investor.
He was the co-founder, chairman, and CEO of Apple; the chairman and majority shareholder of Pixar; a member of The Walt Disney Company's board of directors following its acquisition of Pixar; and the founder, chairman, and CEO of NeXT.
He was a pioneer of the personal computer revolution of the 1970s and 1980s, along with his early business partner and fellow Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak.Jobs was born in San Francisco to a Syrian father and German-American mother.
He was adopted shortly after his birth.
Jobs attended Reed College in 1972 before withdrawing that same year.
In 1974, he traveled through India seeking enlightenment before later studying Zen Buddhism.
He and Wozniak co-founded Apple in 1976 to sell Wozniak's Apple I personal computer.
Together the duo gained fame and wealth a year later with production and sale of the Apple II, one of the first highly successful mass-produced microcomputers.
Jobs saw the commercial potential of the Xerox Alto in 1979, which was mouse-driven and had a graphical user interface (GUI).
This led to the development of the unsuccessful Apple Lisa in 1983, followed by the breakthrough Macintosh in 1984, the first mass-produced computer with a GUI.
The Macintosh introduced the desktop publishing industry in 1985 with the addition of the Apple LaserWriter, the first laser printer to feature vector graphics.In 1985, Jobs was forced out of Apple after a long power struggle with the company's board and its then-CEO, John Sculley.
That same year, Jobs took a few Apple employees with him to found NeXT, a computer platform development company that specialized in computers for higher-education and business markets.
In addition, he helped to develop the visual effects industry when he funded the computer graphics division of George Lucas's Lucasfilm in 1986.
The new company was Pixar, which produced the first 3D computer-animated feature film Toy Story (1995) and went on to become a major animation studio, producing over 25 films since.In 1997, Jobs returned to Apple as CEO after the company's acquisition of NeXT.
He was largely responsible for reviving Apple, which was on the verge of bankruptcy.
He worked closely with British designer Jony Ive to develop a line of products that had larger cultural ramifications, beginning with the "Think different" advertising campaign and leading to the Apple Store, App Store (iOS), iMac, iPad, iPod, iPhone, iTunes, and iTunes Store.
In 2001, the original Mac OS was replaced with the completely new Mac OS X (later known as macOS), based on NeXT's NeXTSTEP platform, giving the operating system a modern Unix-based foundation for the first time.
In 2003, Jobs was diagnosed with a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor.
He died of respiratory arrest related to the tumor in 2011, at the age of 56, with Tim Cook succeeding him as CEO of Apple.
In 2022, he was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.Steven Paul Jobs was born in San Francisco, California, on February 24, 1955, to Joanne Carole Schieble and Abdulfattah "John" Jandali (Arabic: عبد الفتاح الجندلي).
Jandali was born in a Muslim household to wealthy Syrian parents, the youngest of nine siblings.
After obtaining his undergraduate degree at the American University of Beirut, Jandali pursued a PhD in political science at the University of Wisconsin.
There, he met Joanne Schieble, an American Catholic of German descent whose parents owned a mink farm and real estate.
The two fell in love but faced opposition from Schieble's father due to Jandali's Muslim faith.
When Schieble became pregnant, she arranged for a closed adoption, and travelled to San Francisco to give birth.
Schieble requested that her son be adopted by college graduates.
A lawyer and his wife were selected, but they withdrew after discovering that the baby was a boy, so Jobs was instead adopted by Paul Reinhold and Clara (née Hagopian) Jobs.
Paul Jobs was the son of a dairy farmer; after dropping out of high school, he worked as a mechanic, then joined the U.S. Coast Guard.
When his ship was decommissioned, he met Clara Hagopian, an American of Armenian descent, and the two were engaged ten days later, in March 1946, and married that same year.
The couple moved to Wisconsin, then Indiana, where Paul Jobs worked as a machinist and later as a car salesman.
Since Clara missed San Francisco, she convinced Paul to move back.
There, Paul worked as a repossession agent, and Clara became a bookkeeper.
In 1955, after having an ectopic pregnancy, the couple looked to adopt a child.
Since they lacked a college education, Schieble initially refused to sign the adoption papers, and went to court to request that her son be removed from the Jobs household and placed with a different family, but changed her mind after Paul and Clara promised to pay for their son's college tuition.
Of all the inventions of humans, the computer is going to rank near or at the top as history unfolds and we look back.
It is the most awesome tool that we have ever invented.
I feel incredibly lucky to be at exactly the right place in Silicon Valley, at exactly the right time, historically, where this invention has taken form.—Steve Jobs, 1995 In his youth, Jobs' parents took him to a Lutheran church.
When he was in high school, Clara admitted to his girlfriend, Chrisann Brennan, that she "was too frightened to love [Steve] for the first six months of his life … I was scared they were going to take him away from me.
Even after we won the case, Steve was so difficult a child that by the time he was two I felt we had made a mistake.
I wanted to return him."
When Chrisann shared this comment with Steve, he stated that he was already aware,  and later said he had been deeply loved and indulged by Paul and Clara.
Many years later, Jobs's wife Laurene also noted that "he felt he had been really blessed by having the two of them as parents".
[page needed] Jobs would "bristle" when Paul and Clara were referred to as his "adoptive parents", and he regarded them as his parents "1,000%".
Jobs referred to his biological parents as "my sperm and egg bank.
That's not harsh, it's just the way it was, a sperm bank thing, nothing more."
I always thought of myself as a humanities person as a kid, but I liked electronics… then I read something that one of my heroes, Edwin Land of Polaroid, said about the importance of people who could stand at the intersection of humanities and sciences, and I decided that's what I wanted to do.—Steve Jobs Paul Jobs worked in several jobs that included a try as a machinist,  several other jobs,  and then "back to work as a machinist".Paul and Clara adopted Jobs's sister Patricia in 1957  and by 1959 the family had moved to the Monta Loma neighborhood in Mountain View, California.
Paul built a workbench in his garage for his son in order to "pass along his love of mechanics".
Jobs, meanwhile, admired his father's craftsmanship "because he knew how to build anything.
If we needed a cabinet, he would build it.
When he built our fence, he gave me a hammer so I could work with him … I wasn't that into fixing cars … but I was eager to hang out with my dad."
