The Industrial Revolution was a period of global transition of human economy towards more efficient and stable manufacturing processes that succeeded the Agricultural Revolution, starting from Great Britain, continental Europe, and the United States, that occurred during the period from around 1760 to about 1820–1840.
This transition included going from hand production methods to machines; new chemical manufacturing and iron production processes; the increasing use of water power and steam power; the development of machine tools; and the rise of the mechanized factory system.
Output greatly increased, and a result was an unprecedented rise in population and in the rate of population growth.
The textile industry was the first to use modern production methods, : 40  and textiles became the dominant industry in terms of employment, value of output, and capital invested.On a structural level the Industrial Revolution asked society the so-called social question, demanding new ideas for managing large groups of individuals.
Growing poverty on one hand and growing population and materialistic wealth on the other caused tensions between the very rich and the poorest people within society.
These tensions were sometimes violently released  and led to philosophical ideas such as socialism, communism and anarchism.The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain, and many of the technological and architectural innovations were of British origin.
By the mid-18th century, Britain was the world's leading commercial nation,  controlling a global trading empire with colonies in North America and the Caribbean.
Britain had major military and political hegemony on the Indian subcontinent; particularly with the proto-industrialised Mughal Bengal, through the activities of the East India Company.
The development of trade and the rise of business were among the major causes of the Industrial Revolution.
: 15 The Industrial Revolution marked a major turning point in history.
Comparable only to humanity's adoption of agriculture with respect to material advancement,  the Industrial Revolution influenced in some way almost every aspect of daily life.
In particular, average income and population began to exhibit unprecedented sustained growth.
Some economists have said the most important effect of the Industrial Revolution was that the standard of living for the general population in the Western world began to increase consistently for the first time in history, although others have said that it did not begin to improve meaningfully until the late 19th and 20th centuries.
GDP per capita was broadly stable before the Industrial Revolution and the emergence of the modern capitalist economy,  while the Industrial Revolution began an era of per-capita economic growth in capitalist economies.
Economic historians are in agreement that the onset of the Industrial Revolution is the most important event in human history since the domestication of animals and plants.
The precise start and end of the Industrial Revolution is still debated among historians, as is the pace of economic and social changes.
Eric Hobsbawm held that the Industrial Revolution began in Britain in the 1780s and was not fully felt until the 1830s or 1840s,  while T. S. Ashton held that it occurred roughly between 1760 and 1830.
Rapid industrialisation first began in Britain, starting with mechanized textiles spinning in the 1780s,  with high rates of growth in steam power and iron production occurring after 1800.
Mechanized textile production spread from Great Britain to continental Europe and the United States in the early 19th century, with important centres of textiles, iron and coal emerging in Belgium and the United States and later textiles in France.
An economic recession occurred from the late 1830s to the early 1840s when the adoption of the Industrial Revolution's early innovations, such as mechanized spinning and weaving, slowed and their markets matured.
Innovations developed late in the period, such as the increasing adoption of locomotives, steamboats and steamships, and hot blast iron smelting.
New technologies such as the electrical telegraph, widely introduced in the 1840s and 1850s, were not powerful enough to drive high rates of growth.
Rapid economic growth began to occur after 1870, springing from a new group of innovations in what has been called the Second Industrial Revolution.
These innovations included new steel-making processes, mass production, assembly lines, electrical grid systems, the large-scale manufacture of machine tools, and the use of increasingly advanced machinery in steam-powered factories.
The earliest recorded use of the term "Industrial Revolution" was in July 1799 by French envoy Louis-Guillaume Otto, announcing that France had entered the race to industrialise.
In his 1976 book Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society, Raymond Williams states in the entry for "Industry": "The idea of a new social order based on major industrial change was clear in Southey and Owen, between 1811 and 1818, and was implicit as early as Blake in the early 1790s and Wordsworth at the turn of the [19th] century."
The term Industrial Revolution applied to technological change was becoming more common by the late 1830s, as in Jérôme-Adolphe Blanqui's description in 1837 of la révolution industrielle.
Friedrich Engels in The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 spoke of "an industrial revolution, a revolution which at the same time changed the whole of civil society".
Although Engels wrote his book in the 1840s, it was not translated into English until the late 19th century, and his expression did not enter everyday language until then.
Credit for popularising the term may be given to Arnold Toynbee, whose 1881 lectures gave a detailed account of the term.
Economic historians and authors such as Mendels, Pomeranz, and Kridte argue that proto-industrialization in parts of Europe, the Muslim world, Mughal India, and China created the social and economic conditions that led to the Industrial Revolution, thus causing the Great Divergence.
Some historians, such as John Clapham and Nicholas Crafts, have argued that the economic and social changes occurred gradually and that the term revolution is a misnomer.
This is still a subject of debate among some historians.
Six factors facilitated industrialization: high levels of agricultural productivity (see British Agricultural Revolution) to provide excess manpower and food; a pool of managerial and entrepreneurial skills;  available ports, rivers, canals, and roads to cheaply move raw materials and outputs; natural resources such as coal, iron, and waterfalls; political stability and a legal system that supported business; and financial capital available to invest.
Once industrialization began in Great Britain, new factors can be added: the eagerness of British entrepreneurs to export industrial expertise and the willingness to import the process.
Britain met the criteria and industrialized starting in the 18th century, and then it exported the process to western Europe (especially Belgium, France, and the German states) in the early 19th century.
The United States copied the British model in the early 19th century, and Japan copied the Western European models in the late 19th century.
The commencement of the Industrial Revolution is closely linked to a small number of innovations,  beginning in the second half of the 18th century.
By the 1830s, the following gains had been made in important technologies:In 1750 Britain imported 2.5 million pounds of raw cotton, most of which was spun and woven by the cottage industry in Lancashire.
The work was done by hand in workers' homes or occasionally in master weavers' shops.
Wages in Lancashire were about six times those in India in 1770 when overall productivity in Britain was about three times higher than in India.
In 1787 raw cotton consumption was 22 million pounds, most of which was cleaned, carded, and spun on machines.
: 41–42  The British textile industry used 52 million pounds of cotton in 1800, which increased to 588 million pounds in 1850.
The share of value added by the cotton textile industry in Britain was 2.6% in 1760, 17% in 1801, and 22.4% in 1831.
Value added by the British woollen industry was 14.1% in 1801.
Cotton factories in Britain numbered approximately 900 in 1797.
In 1760 approximately one-third of cotton cloth manufactured in Britain was exported, rising to two-thirds by 1800.
In 1781 cotton spun amounted to 5.1 million pounds, which increased to 56 million pounds by 1800.
In 1800 less than 0.1% of world cotton cloth was produced on machinery invented in Britain.
In 1788 there were 50,000 spindles in Britain, rising to 7 million over the next 30 years.
