Pablo Ruiz Picasso[a][b] (25 October 1881 – 8 April 1973) was a Spanish painter, sculptor, printmaker, ceramicist and theatre designer who spent most of his adult life in France.
One of the most influential artists of the 20th century, he is known for co-founding the Cubist movement, the invention of constructed sculpture,   the co-invention of collage, and for the wide variety of styles that he helped develop and explore.
Among his most famous works are the proto-Cubist Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907), and the anti-war painting Guernica (1937), a dramatic portrayal of the bombing of Guernica by German and Italian air forces during the Spanish Civil War.Picasso demonstrated extraordinary artistic talent in his early years, painting in a naturalistic manner through his childhood and adolescence.
During the first decade of the 20th century, his style changed as he experimented with different theories, techniques, and ideas.
After 1906, the Fauvist work of the older artist Henri Matisse motivated Picasso to explore more radical styles, beginning a fruitful rivalry between the two artists, who subsequently were often paired by critics as the leaders of modern art.
Picasso's work is often categorized into periods.
While the names of many of his later periods are debated, the most commonly accepted periods in his work are the Blue Period (1901–1904), the Rose Period (1904–1906), the African-influenced Period (1907–1909), Analytic Cubism (1909–1912), and Synthetic Cubism (1912–1919), also referred to as the Crystal period.
Much of Picasso's work of the late 1910s and early 1920s is in a neoclassical style, and his work in the mid-1920s often has characteristics of Surrealism.
His later work often combines elements of his earlier styles.Exceptionally prolific throughout the course of his long life, Picasso achieved universal renown and immense fortune for his revolutionary artistic accomplishments, and became one of the best-known figures in 20th-century art.Picasso was born at 23:15 on 25 October 1881, in the city of Málaga, Andalusia, in southern Spain.
He was the first child of Don José Ruiz y Blasco (1838–1913) and María Picasso y López.
Picasso's family was of middle-class background.
His father was a painter who specialized in naturalistic depictions of birds and other game.
For most of his life, Ruiz was a professor of art at the School of Crafts and a curator of a local museum.
Ruiz's ancestors were minor aristocrats.Picasso's birth certificate and the record of his baptism include very long names, combining those of various saints and relatives.
[a][c] Ruiz y Picasso were his paternal and maternal surnames, respectively, per Spanish custom.
The surname "Picasso" comes from Liguria, a coastal region of north-western Italy.
Pablo's maternal great-grandfather, Tommaso Picasso, moved to Spain around 1807.
Picasso showed a passion and a skill for drawing from an early age.
According to his mother, his first words were "piz, piz", a shortening of lápiz, the Spanish word for "pencil".
From the age of seven, Picasso received formal artistic training from his father in figure drawing and oil painting.
Ruiz was a traditional academic artist and instructor, who believed that proper training required disciplined copying of the masters, and drawing the human body from plaster casts and live models.
His son became preoccupied with art to the detriment of his classwork.The family moved to A Coruña in 1891, where his father became a professor at the School of Fine Arts.
They stayed almost four years.
On one occasion, the father found his son painting over his unfinished sketch of a pigeon.
Observing the precision of his son's technique, an apocryphal story relates, Ruiz felt that the thirteen-year-old Picasso had surpassed him, and vowed to give up painting,  though paintings by him exist from later years.In 1895, Picasso was traumatized when his seven-year-old sister, Conchita, died of diphtheria.
After her death, the family moved to Barcelona, where Ruiz took a position at its School of Fine Arts.
Picasso thrived in the city, regarding it in times of sadness or nostalgia as his true home.
Ruiz persuaded the officials at the academy to allow his son to take an entrance exam for the advanced class.
This process often took students a month, but Picasso completed it in a week, and the jury admitted him, at just 13.
As a student, Picasso lacked discipline but made friendships that would affect him in later life.
His father rented a small room for him close to home so he could work alone, yet he checked up on him numerous times a day, judging his drawings.
The two argued frequently.
Picasso's father and uncle decided to send the young artist to Madrid's Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando, the country's foremost art school.
At age 16, Picasso set off for the first time on his own, but he disliked formal instruction and stopped attending classes soon after enrollment.
Madrid held many other attractions.
The Prado housed paintings by Diego Velázquez, Francisco Goya, and Francisco Zurbarán.
Picasso especially admired the works of El Greco; elements such as his elongated limbs, arresting colours, and mystical visages are echoed in Picasso's later work.
Picasso's training under his father began before 1890.
His progress can be traced in the collection of early works now held by the Museu Picasso in Barcelona, which provides one of the most comprehensive records extant of any major artist's beginnings.
During 1893 the juvenile quality of his earliest work falls away, and by 1894 his career as a painter can be said to have begun.
The academic realism apparent in the works of the mid-1890s is well displayed in The First Communion (1896), a large composition that depicts his sister, Lola.
In the same year, at the age of 14, he painted Portrait of Aunt Pepa, a vigorous and dramatic portrait that Juan-Eduardo Cirlot has called "without a doubt one of the greatest in the whole history of Spanish painting."
In 1897, his realism began to show a Symbolist influence, for example, in a series of landscape paintings rendered in non-naturalistic violet and green tones.
What some call his Modernist period (1899–1900) followed.
His exposure to the work of Rossetti, Steinlen, Toulouse-Lautrec and Edvard Munch, combined with his admiration for favourite old masters such as El Greco, led Picasso to a personal version of modernism in his works of this period.
Picasso made his first trip to Paris, then the art capital of Europe, in 1900.
There, he met his first Parisian friend, journalist and poet Max Jacob, who helped Picasso learn the language and its literature.
Soon they shared an apartment; Max slept at night while Picasso slept during the day and worked at night.
These were times of severe poverty, cold, and desperation.
Much of his work was burned to keep the small room warm.
