Jane Austen (/ˈɒstɪn, ˈɔːs-/; 16 December 1775 – 18 July 1817) was an English novelist known primarily for her six major novels, which interpret, critique, and comment upon the British landed gentry at the end of the 18th century.
Austen's plots often explore the dependence of women on marriage in the pursuit of favourable social standing and economic security.
Her works critique the novels of sensibility of the second half of the 18th century and are part of the transition to 19th-century literary realism.
[b] Her use of social commentary, realism and biting irony have earned her acclaim among critics and scholars.The anonymously published Sense and Sensibility (1811),  Pride and Prejudice (1813), Mansfield Park (1814), and Emma (1815), brought modest success but little fame in her lifetime.
She wrote two other novels—Northanger Abbey and Persuasion, both published posthumously in 1818—and began another, eventually titled Sanditon, but died before its completion.
She also left behind three volumes of juvenile writings in manuscript, the short epistolary novel Lady Susan, and the unfinished novel The Watsons.Austen gained status after her death; her six full-length novels have since rarely been out of print.
A significant transition in her reputation occurred in 1833 when her novels were republished in Richard Bentley's Standard Novels series, illustrated by Ferdinand Pickering, and sold as a set.
They gradually gained wide acclaim and popular readership.
In 1869, fifty-two years after her death, her nephew's publication of A Memoir of Jane Austen introduced a compelling version of her writing career and supposedly uneventful life to an eager audience.
She has inspired a large number of critical essays and literary anthologies.
Her novels have inspired many films, from 1940's Pride and Prejudice to 1995's Sense and Sensibility and  Love & Friendship in 2016.The scant biographical information about Austen comes from her few surviving letters and sketches her family members wrote about her.
Only about 160 of the approximately 3,000 letters Austen wrote have survived and been published.
Cassandra Austen destroyed the bulk of the letters she received from her sister, burning or otherwise destroying them.
She  wanted to ensure that the "younger nieces did not read any of Jane's sometimes acid or forthright comments on neighbours or family members".
In the interest of protecting reputations from Jane's penchant for honesty and forthrightness, Cassandra omitted details of illnesses, unhappiness and anything she considered unsavory.
Important details about the Austen family were elided by intention, such as any mention of Austen's brother George, whose undiagnosed developmental challenges led the family to send him away from home; the two brothers sent away to the navy at an early age; or wealthy Aunt Leigh-Perrot, arrested and tried on charges of larceny.
The first Austen biography was Henry Thomas Austen's 1818 "Biographical Notice".
It appeared in a posthumous edition of Northanger Abbey and included extracts from two letters, against the judgement of other family members.
Details of Austen's life continued to be omitted or embellished in her nephew's A Memoir of Jane Austen, published in 1869, and in William and Richard Arthur Austen-Leigh's biography Jane Austen: Her Life and Letters, published in 1913, all of which included additional letters.
Austen's family and relatives built a legend of "good quiet Aunt Jane", portraying her as a woman in a happy domestic situation, whose family was the mainstay of her life.
Modern biographers include details excised from the letters and family biographies, but the biographer Jan Fergus writes that the challenge is to keep the view balanced, not to present her languishing in periods of deep unhappiness as "an embittered, disappointed woman trapped in a thoroughly unpleasant family".
Jane Austen was born in Steventon, Hampshire, on 16 December 1775 in a harsh winter.
Her father wrote of her arrival in a letter that her mother "certainly expected to have been brought to bed a month ago".
He added that the newborn infant was "a present plaything for Cassy and a future companion".
The winter of 1776 was particularly harsh and it was not until 5 April that she was baptised at the local church with the single name Jane.
George Austen (1731–1805), served as the rector of the Anglican parishes of Steventon and Deane.
[c] The Reverend Austen came from an old and wealthy family of wool merchants.
As each generation of eldest sons received inheritances, the wealth was divided, and George's branch of the family fell into poverty.
He and his two sisters were orphaned as children, and had to be taken in by relatives.
In 1745, at the age of fifteen, George Austen's sister Philadelphia was apprenticed to a milliner in Covent Garden.
At the age of sixteen, George entered St John's College, Oxford,  where he most likely met Cassandra Leigh (1739–1827).
She came from the prominent Leigh family; her father was rector at All Souls College, Oxford, where she grew up among the gentry.
Her eldest brother James inherited a fortune and large estate from his great-aunt Perrot, with the only condition that he change his name to Leigh-Perrot.
George Austen and Cassandra Leigh were engaged, probably around 1763, when they exchanged miniatures.
He received the living of the Steventon parish from the wealthy husband of his second cousin, Thomas Knight.
They married on 26 April 1764 at St Swithin's Church in Bath, by license, in a simple ceremony, two months after Cassandra's father died.
Their income was modest, with George's small per annum living; Cassandra brought to the marriage the expectation of a small inheritance at the time of her mother's death.
The Austens took up temporary residence at the nearby Deane rectory until Steventon, a 16th-century house in disrepair, underwent necessary renovations.
Cassandra gave birth to three children while living at Deane: James in 1765, George in 1766, and Edward in 1767.
Her custom was to keep an infant at home for several months and then place it with Elizabeth Littlewood, a woman living nearby to nurse and raise for twelve to eighteen months.
In 1768, the family finally took up residence in Steventon.
Henry was the first child to be born there, in 1771.
At about this time, Cassandra could no longer ignore the signs that little George was developmentally disabled.
He was subject to seizures, may have been deaf and mute, and she chose to send him out to be fostered.
In 1773, Cassandra was born, followed by Francis in 1774, and Jane in 1775.
According to Professor of Literature Park Honan, the atmosphere of the Austen home was an "open, amused, easy intellectual" one, where the ideas of those with whom the Austens might disagree politically or socially were considered and discussed.
The family relied on the patronage of their kin and hosted visits from numerous family members.
Mrs Austen spent the summer of 1770 in London with George's sister, Philadelphia, and her daughter Eliza, accompanied by his other sister, Mrs Walter and her daughter Philly.
[d] Philadelphia and Eliza Hancock were, according to Le Faye, "the bright comets flashing into an otherwise placid solar system of clerical life in rural Hampshire, and the news of their foreign travels and fashionable London life, together with their sudden descents upon the Steventon household in between times, all helped to widen Jane's youthful horizon and influence her later life and works."
Cassandra Austen's cousin Thomas Leigh visited a number of times in the 1770s and 1780s, inviting young Cassie to visit them in Bath in 1781.
