The Big Bang event is a physical theory that describes how the universe expanded from an initial state of high density and temperature.
Various cosmological models of the Big Bang explain the evolution of the observable universe from the earliest known periods through its subsequent large-scale form.
These models offer a comprehensive explanation for a broad range of observed phenomena, including the abundance of light elements, the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation, and large-scale structure.
The overall uniformity of the Universe, known as the flatness problem, is explained through cosmic inflation: a sudden and very rapid expansion of space during the earliest moments.
However, physics currently lacks a widely accepted theory of quantum gravity that can successfully model the earliest conditions of the Big Bang.Crucially, these models are compatible with the Hubble–Lemaître law—the observation that the farther away a galaxy is, the faster it is moving away from Earth.
Extrapolating this cosmic expansion backwards in time using the known laws of physics, the models describe an increasingly concentrated cosmos preceded by a singularity in which space and time lose meaning (typically named "the Big Bang singularity").
In 1964 the CMB was discovered, which convinced many cosmologists that the competing steady-state model of cosmic evolution was falsified,  since the Big Bang models predict a uniform background radiation caused by high temperatures and densities in the distant past.
A wide range of empirical evidence strongly favors the Big Bang event, which is now essentially universally accepted.
Detailed measurements of the expansion rate of the universe place the Big Bang singularity at an estimated 13.787±0.020 billion years ago, which is considered the age of the universe.
There remain aspects of the observed universe that are not yet adequately explained by the Big Bang models.
After its initial expansion, the universe cooled sufficiently to allow the formation of subatomic particles, and later atoms.
The unequal abundances of matter and antimatter that allowed this to occur is an unexplained effect known as baryon asymmetry.
These primordial elements—mostly hydrogen, with some helium and lithium—later coalesced through gravity, forming early stars and galaxies.
Astronomers observe the gravitational effects of an unknown dark matter surrounding galaxies.
Most of the gravitational potential in the universe seems to be in this form, and the Big Bang models and various observations indicate that this excess gravitational potential is not created by baryonic matter, such as normal atoms.
Measurements of the redshifts of supernovae indicate that the expansion of the universe is accelerating, an observation attributed to an unexplained phenomenon known as dark energy.
The Big Bang models offer a comprehensive explanation for a broad range of observed phenomena, including the abundances of the light elements, the CMB, large-scale structure, and Hubble's law.
The models depend on two major assumptions: the universality of physical laws and the cosmological principle.
The universality of physical laws is one of the underlying principles of the theory of relativity.
The cosmological principle states that on large scales the universe is homogeneous and isotropic—appearing the same in all directions regardless of location.
These ideas were initially taken as postulates, but later efforts were made to test each of them.
For example, the first assumption has been tested by observations showing that largest possible deviation of the fine-structure constant over much of the age of the universe is of order 10−5.
Also, general relativity has passed stringent tests on the scale of the Solar System and binary stars.
[notes 1]The large-scale universe appears isotropic as viewed from Earth.
If it is indeed isotropic, the cosmological principle can be derived from the simpler Copernican principle, which states that there is no preferred (or special) observer or vantage point.
To this end, the cosmological principle has been confirmed to a level of 10−5 via observations of the temperature of the CMB.
At the scale of the CMB horizon, the universe has been measured to be homogeneous with an upper bound on the order of 10% inhomogeneity, as of 1995.
The expansion of the Universe was inferred from early twentieth century astronomical observations and is an essential ingredient of the Big Bang models.
Mathematically, general relativity describes spacetime by a metric, which determines the distances that separate nearby points.
The points, which can be relative to galaxies, stars, or other objects, are specified using a coordinate chart or "grid" that is laid down over all spacetime.
The cosmological principle implies that the metric should be homogeneous and isotropic on large scales, which uniquely singles out the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW) metric.
This metric contains a scale factor, which describes how the size of the universe changes with time.
This enables a convenient choice of a coordinate system to be made, called comoving coordinates.
In this coordinate system, the grid expands along with the universe, and objects that are moving only because of the expansion of the universe remain at fixed points on the grid.
While their coordinate distance (comoving distance) remains constant, the physical distance between two such co-moving points expands proportionally with the scale factor of the universe.
The Big Bang is not an explosion of matter moving outward to fill an empty universe.
Instead, space itself expands with time everywhere and increases the physical distances between comoving points.
In other words, the Big Bang is not an explosion in space, but rather an expansion of space.
Because the FLRW metric assumes a uniform distribution of mass and energy, it applies to our universe only on large scales—local concentrations of matter such as our galaxy do not necessarily expand with the same speed as the whole Universe.
An important feature of the Big Bang spacetime is the presence of particle horizons.
Since the universe has a finite age, and light travels at a finite speed, there may be events in the past whose light has not yet had time to reach us.
This places a limit or a past horizon on the most distant objects that can be observed.
Conversely, because space is expanding, and more distant objects are receding ever more quickly, light emitted by us today may never "catch up" to very distant objects.
This defines a future horizon, which limits the events in the future that we will be able to influence.
The presence of either type of horizon depends on the details of the FLRW model that describes our universe.
Our understanding of the universe back to very early times suggests that there is a past horizon, though in practice our view is also limited by the opacity of the universe at early times.
So our view cannot extend further backward in time, though the horizon recedes in space.
If the expansion of the universe continues to accelerate, there is a future horizon as well.
Some processes in the early universe occurred too slowly, compared to the expansion rate of the universe, to reach approximate thermodynamic equilibrium.
Others were fast enough to reach thermalization.
