George Washington (February 22, 1732[b] – December 14, 1799) was an American military officer, statesman, and Founding Father who served as the first president of the United States from 1789 to 1797.
Appointed by the Continental Congress as commander of the Continental Army, Washington led Patriot forces to victory in the American Revolutionary War and served as president of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, which created and ratified the Constitution of the United States and the American federal government.
Washington has been called the "Father of his Country" for his manifold leadership in the nation's founding.
Washington's first public office, from 1749 to 1750, was as surveyor of Culpeper County, Virginia.
He subsequently received his first military training and was assigned command of the Virginia Regiment during the French and Indian War.
He was later elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses and was named a delegate to the Continental Congress, where he was appointed Commanding General of the Continental Army and led American forces allied with France to a decisive victory over the British at the siege of Yorktown in 1781 during the Revolutionary War, paving the way for American independence.
He resigned his commission in 1783 after the Treaty of Paris was signed.Washington played an indispensable role in adopting and ratifying the Constitution of the United States, which replaced the Articles of Confederation in 1789 and remains the world's longest-standing written and codified national constitution to this day.
[c] He was then twice elected president by the Electoral College unanimously.
As the first U.S. president, Washington implemented a strong, well-financed national government while remaining impartial in a fierce rivalry that emerged between cabinet members Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton.
During the French Revolution, he proclaimed a policy of neutrality while sanctioning the Jay Treaty.
He set enduring precedents for the office of president, including use of the title "Mr. President" and taking an Oath of Office with his hand on a Bible.
His Farewell Address on September 19, 1796, is widely regarded as a preeminent statement on republicanism.Washington was a slave owner who had a complicated relationship with slavery.
During his lifetime, he owned a cumulative total of over 577 slaves, who were forced to work on his farms and wherever he lived, including the President's House in Philadelphia.
Yet, as president, he also signed laws passed by Congress that both protected and curtailed slavery.
His will stated that one of his slaves, William Lee, should be freed upon his death and that the other 123 slaves should be freed on his wife's death, though she freed them earlier during her lifetime.
Washington endeavored to assimilate Native Americans into the Anglo-American culture.
He also waged military campaigns against Native American nations during the Revolutionary War and the Northwest Indian War.
He was a member of the Anglican Church and the Freemasons and supported broad religious freedom as the Continental Army commanding general and nation's first president.
Upon his death, Washington was eulogized by Henry "Light-Horse Harry" Lee as "first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen".
Washington has been memorialized by monuments, a federal holiday, various media depictions, geographical locations including the national capital, the State of Washington, stamps, and currency.
Many scholars and ordinary Americans alike rank him among the greatest U.S. presidents.
In 1976, Washington was posthumously promoted to the rank of General of the Armies, the highest rank in the U.S. Army.The Washington family was a wealthy Virginia planter family that had made its fortune through land speculation and the cultivation of tobacco.
Washington's great-grandfather John Washington emigrated in 1656  from Sulgrave, Northamptonshire, England, to the English colony of Virginia where he accumulated 5,000 acres (2,000 ha) of land, including Little Hunting Creek on the Potomac River.
George Washington was born on February 22, 1732,[b] at Popes Creek in Westmoreland County, in the British colony of Virginia,  and was the first of six children of Augustine and Mary Ball Washington.
His father was a justice of the peace and a prominent public figure who had four additional children from his first marriage to Jane Butler.
The family moved to Little Hunting Creek in 1735.
In 1738, they moved to Ferry Farm near Fredericksburg, Virginia, on the Rappahannock River.
When Augustine died in 1743, Washington inherited Ferry Farm and ten slaves; his older half-brother Lawrence inherited Little Hunting Creek and renamed it Mount Vernon.
Washington did not have the formal education his elder brothers received at Appleby Grammar School in England, but he did attend the Lower Church School in Hartfield.
He learned mathematics, trigonometry, and land surveying and became a talented draftsman and map-maker.
By early adulthood, he was writing with "considerable force" and "precision".
In his pursuit of admiration, status, and power, his writing displayed little wit or humor.
Washington often visited Mount Vernon and Belvoir, the plantation that belonged to William Fairfax, Lawrence's father-in-law.
Fairfax became Washington's patron and surrogate father, and Washington spent a month in 1748 with a team surveying Fairfax's Shenandoah Valley property.
The following year, he received a surveyor's license from the College of William & Mary when he was 17 years old.
[d] Even though Washington had not served the customary apprenticeship, Fairfax appointed him surveyor of Culpeper County, Virginia, and he appeared in Culpeper County to take his oath of office July 20, 1749.
He subsequently familiarized himself with the frontier region, and though he resigned from the job in 1750, he continued to do surveys west of the Blue Ridge Mountains.
By 1752 he had bought almost 1,500 acres (600 ha) in the Valley and owned 2,315 acres (937 ha).
In 1751, Washington made his only trip abroad when he accompanied Lawrence to Barbados, hoping the climate would cure his brother's tuberculosis.
Washington contracted smallpox during that trip, which immunized him and left his face slightly scarred.
Lawrence died in 1752, and Washington leased Mount Vernon from his widow Anne; he inherited it outright after her death in 1761.
Lawrence Washington's service as adjutant general of the Virginia militia inspired his half-brother George to seek a commission.
Virginia's lieutenant governor, Robert Dinwiddie, appointed George Washington as a major and commander of one of the four militia districts.
The British and French were competing for control of the Ohio Valley.
While the British were constructing forts along the Ohio River, the French were doing the same, constructing forts between the Ohio River and Lake Erie.
In October 1753, Dinwiddie appointed Washington as a special envoy.
He had sent George to demand French forces to vacate land that was being claimed by the British.
[e] Washington was also appointed to make peace with the Iroquois Confederacy, and to gather further intelligence about the French forces.
Washington met with Half-King Tanacharison, and other Iroquois chiefs, at Logstown, and gathered information about the numbers and locations of the French forts, as well as intelligence concerning individuals taken prisoner by the French.
Washington was given the nickname Conotocaurius (town destroyer or devourer of villages) by Tanacharison.
