The Holocaust, also known as the Shoah,[a] was the genocide of European Jews during World War II.
Between 1941 and 1945, Nazi Germany and its collaborators systematically murdered some six million Jews across German-occupied Europe, around two-thirds of Europe's Jewish population.
The murders were carried out primarily through mass shootings and poison gas in extermination camps, chiefly Auschwitz-Birkenau, Treblinka, Belzec, Sobibor, and Chełmno in occupied Poland.The Nazis developed their ideology based on previous politics of racism and German colonization of Eastern Europe and seized power in early 1933.
In an attempt to force all German Jews to emigrate, the regime passed anti-Jewish laws and orchestrated a nationwide pogrom in November 1938.
After Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, occupation authorities began to establish ghettos to segregate Jews.
Following the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, around 1.5 to 2 million Jews were shot by German forces and local collaborators.Later in 1941 or early 1942, the highest levels of the German government decided to murder all Jews throughout Europe.
Victims were deported by rail to extermination camps where, if they survived the journey, most were killed with poison gas.
Other Jews continued to be employed in forced labor camps where many died from starvation or exhaustion.
Although many Jews tried to escape, surviving in hiding was very difficult due to factors such as the lack of money to pay helpers and the risk of denunciation.
The property, homes, and jobs belonging to murdered Jews were redistributed to the German occupiers and other non-Jews.
Although the majority of Holocaust victims died in 1942, the killing continued at a lower rate until the end of the war in May 1945.The Nazi regime and its allies also killed millions of non-Jewish civilians, although Jews made up the majority of the civilian war-related deaths in some European countries.
Many Jewish survivors emigrated outside of Europe after the war.
A few Holocaust perpetrators faced criminal trials.
Billions of dollars in reparations have been paid, although falling short of the Jews' losses.
The Holocaust has also been commemorated in museums, memorials, and culture.
It has become central to Western historical consciousness as a symbol of the ultimate human evil.The term Holocaust, derived from a Greek word meaning "burnt offering",  has become the most common word used to describe the Nazi extermination of Jews in English and many other languages.
The term Holocaust is sometimes used to refer to other groups that the Nazis targeted.
By the 1970s, the qualifying adjective Jewish was dropped as redundant and Holocaust, now capitalized, became the default term for the destruction of European Jews.
The Hebrew word Shoah ("catastrophic destruction") exclusively refers to Jewish victims.
The perpetrators used the phrase "Final Solution" to describe their actions towards Jews.
Jews have lived in Europe for more than two thousand years.
Throughout the Middle Ages in Europe, Jews were subjected to antisemitism based on Christian theology, which blamed them for killing Jesus.
In the nineteenth century many European countries granted full citizenship rights to Jews in hopes that they would assimilate.
By the early twentieth century, most Jews in central and western Europe were well integrated into society, while in eastern Europe, where emancipation had arrived later, many Jews still lived in small towns, spoke Yiddish, and practiced Orthodox Judaism.
Political antisemitism positing the existence of a Jewish question and usually an international Jewish conspiracy emerged in the eighteenth and nineteenth century due to the rise of nationalism in Europe and industrialization that increased economic conflicts between Jews and non-Jews.
Some scientists began to categorize humans into different races and argued that there was a life or death struggle between them.
Many racists argued that Jews were a separate racial group alien to Europe.
The around 500,000 German Jews made up less than 1 percent of the country's population in 1933.
They were wealthier on average than other Germans and largely assimilated, although a minority were recent immigrants from eastern Europe.
The turn of the twentieth century saw a major effort to establish a German colonial empire overseas, leading to the Herero and Nama genocide and subsequent racial apartheid regime in South West Africa.
World War I (1914–1918) intensified nationalist and racist sentiments in Germany and other European countries.
Jews in eastern Europe were targeted by widespread pogroms.
Germany lost two million war dead and substantial territory;  opposition to the postwar settlement united Germans across the political spectrum.
The military promoted the untrue but compelling idea that, rather than being defeated on the battlefield, Germany had been stabbed in the back by socialists and Jews.
The Nazi Party was founded in the wake of the war,  and its ideology is often cited as the main factor explaining the Holocaust.
The Nazis defined the German nation as a racial community unbounded by Germany's physical borders  and sought to purge it of racially foreign and socially deficient elements.
The Nazi Party and its leader, Adolf Hitler, were also obsessed with reversing Germany's territorial losses and acquiring additional Lebensraum (living space) in Eastern Europe for colonization.
These ideas appealed to many Germans.
The Nazis promised to protect European civilization from the Soviet threat.
Hitler believed that Jews controlled the Soviet Union, as well as the Western powers, and were plotting to destroy Germany.
Amidst a worldwide economic depression and political fragmentation, the Nazi Party rapidly increased its support, reaching a high of 37 percent in mid-1932 elections,   by campaigning on issues such as anticommunism and economic recovery.
Hitler was appointed chancellor in January 1933 in a backroom deal supported by right-wing politicians.
Within months, all other political parties were banned, the regime seized control of the media,  tens of thousands of political opponents—especially communists—were arrested, and a system of camps for extrajudicial imprisonment was set up.
The Nazi regime cracked down on crime and social outsiders—such as Roma and Sinti, homosexual men, and those perceived as workshy—through a variety of measures, including imprisonment in concentration camps.
The Nazis forcibly sterilized 400,000 people and subjected others to forced abortions for real or supposed hereditary illnesses.
Although the Nazis sought to control every aspect of public and private life,  Nazi repression was directed almost entirely against groups perceived as outside the national community.
Most Germans had little to fear provided they did not oppose the new regime.
The new regime built popular support through economic growth, which partly occurred through state-led measures such as rearmament.
The annexations of Austria (1938), Sudetenland (1938), and Bohemia and Moravia (1939) also increased the Nazis' popular support.
Germans were inundated with propaganda both against Jews  and other groups targeted by the Nazis.
