Can tell hes in it for the right reasons kelce added mahomes called the entire visit surreal i.
Thankful for all that the white house staff did for us along with the president he was phenomenal.
His mother and lack of skill forced him to quit noting one coach told him you run faster.
The history of this great nation that we have it was really cool for me to just be.
We saw him play with that high ankle sprain another legendary chapter in the story of one of.
Mvp patrick mahomes who with tight end travis kelce presented the president with a chiefs jersey at the.
Most elusive things in the world unity the chiefs beat the philadelphia eagles in a thrilling shootout at.
Oval office and over in the west wing it was just it was pretty eyeopening and you can.
University of delaware before his mother and lack of skill forced him to quit noting one coach told.
A dynasty the president also acknowledged first lady and famous philadelphia sports fan dr jill biden i married.
Bowl champion kansas city chiefs to the white house monday offering effusive praise for players performance on and.
One of the most elusive things in the world unity the chiefs beat the philadelphia eagles in a.
Lady and famous philadelphia sports fan dr jill biden i married a philly girl that explains a lot.
The chiefs clark hunt he said and the chiefs not only hold the title again theyre building a.
Faster backward than anyone ive ever seen well my political opposition thinks the same thing he quipped following.
Hunt for whom the afc trophy is named who was the only woman to attend every super bowl.
You can tell hes in it for the right reasons kelce added mahomes called the entire visit surreal.
Together here as the united states and be a part of that kelce also offered praise for biden.
Also offered praise for biden telling reporters he enjoyed hearing president biden talk about the pieces and the.
And lack of skill forced him to quit noting one coach told him you run faster backward than.
A philly girl that explains a lot doesnt it he joked fortunately she is overseas right now in.
History of this great nation that we have it was really cool for me to just be here.
All rights reserved cnn sans cable news network.
Patrick boy can play man biden said twotime mvp comeback king the only player in history with a.
Offer a tribute to the late norma hunt wife of the chiefs founder lamar hunt for whom the.
It being as cool as it was cable news network a warner bros discovery company all rights reserved.
A rough night and he noted his own brief time playing football at the university of delaware before.
Is overseas right now in the middle east shes a rabid eagles fan and the way the game.
The monuments or memorials mahomes told reporters and so to be able to be here and see that.
Ankle sprain another legendary chapter in the story of one of the most elusive things in the world.
Doesnt it he joked fortunately she is overseas right now in the middle east shes a rabid eagles.
Praise for super bowl mvp patrick mahomes who with tight end travis kelce presented the president with a.
The moment and i dont think i could ever really imagine it being as cool as it was.
We have it was really cool for me to just be here and be in the moment and.
This great nation that we have it was really cool for me to just be here and be.
During the south lawn ceremony speaking out for racial justice honoring veterans as you do supporting tutors and.
Said he took us gave us a couple of personal talks there and he was tremendous with it.
To him in the oval office and over in the west wing it was just it was pretty.
For players performance on and off the field most important as much as these guys know about football.
Biden said twotime mvp comeback king the only player in history with a winning record when down by.
Mean ive never been to washington dc ive never even got to see from the outside seeing the.
Quarterback named patrick boy can play man biden said twotime mvp comeback king the only player in history.
House staff did for us along with the president he was phenomenal reid said he took us gave.
Really gracious being here and thankful for all that the white house staff did for us along with.
Whether youre a democrat or republican or independent its about the unity and the opportunity to come together.
That and see the history of this great nation that we have it was really cool for me.
Super bowl lvii in february it was the teams second super bowl victory in four years having won.
Time playing football at the university of delaware before his mother and lack of skill forced him to.
Was pretty eyeopening and you can tell hes in it for the right reasons kelce added mahomes called.
Was really cool for me to just be here and be in the moment and i dont think.
