Nationalist and socialist he served as the president of the african national congress.
Father came to stay at qunu where he died of an undiagnosed ailment.
Fort hare and the university of witwatersrand before working as a lawyer in.
Cadet branch of the royal family were morganatic ineligible to inherit the throne.
Entrusted to the guardianship of the thembu regent chief jongintaba dalindyebo although he.
Through the charitable nelson mandela foundationmandela was a controversial figure for much of.
Was sentenced to life imprisonment for conspiring to overthrow the statemandela served years.
His life although critics on the right denounced him as a communist terrorist.
Deputy thabo mbeki mandela became an elder statesman and focused on combating poverty.
As secretarygeneral of the nonaligned movement from to he declined a second presidential.
South africas cape province given the forename rolihlahlanote a xhosa term colloquially meaning.
Appointed to the position in after his predecessor was accused of corruption by.
Promulgated a new constitution mandela emphasised reconciliation between the countrys racial groups and.
Election in which mandela led the anc to victory and became president leading.
Chief jongintaba dalindyebo although he did not see his mother again for many.
Mandelas father gadla henry mphakanyiswa mandela was a local chief and councillor to.
His patrilineal greatgrandfather ngubengcuka was ruler of the thembu kingdom in the transkeian.
Education that day miss mdingane told me that my new name was nelson.
Often referred to by his thembu clan name madiba and described as the.
English xhosa history and geography he developed a love of african history listening.
He was appointed president of the ancs transvaal branch rising to prominence for.
Although initially committed to nonviolent protest in association with the sacp he cofounded.
He secretly joined the banned south african communist party sacp although initially committed.
Friend a speaker of sotho and coming under the influence of one of.
Ideologically an african nationalist and socialist he served as the president of the.
The countrys racial groups and created the truth and reconciliation commission to investigate.
Position in after his predecessor was accused of corruption by a governing white.
The influence of one of his favourite teachers a xhosa who broke taboo.
July in the village of qunu where he tended herds as a cattleboy.
God qamata gadla was a polygamist with four wives four sons and nine.
As the president of the african national congress anc party from to a.
His wife noengland treated him as their own child raising him alongside their.
Mother being a devout christian sent him to a local methodist school when.
His patrilineal greatgrandfather ngubengcuka was ruler of the thembu kingdom in the transkeian.
Nosekeni fanny daughter of nkedama of the right hand house and a member.
The amampemvu clan of the xhosa no one in my family had ever.
A south african antiapartheid activist and politician who served as the first president.
Of the people he was repeatedly arrested for seditious activities and was unsuccessfully.
Antiimperialist rhetoric of a visiting chief joyi nevertheless at the time he considered.
The magistrates unreasonable demands a devotee of the god qamata gadla was a.
Sons named mandela was nelsons grandfather and the source of his surname because.
The treason trial influenced by marxism he secretly joined the banned south african.
Treason trial influenced by marxism he secretly joined the banned south african communist.
That my new name was nelson why this particular name i have no.
With other boys both his parents were illiterate but his mother being a.
Councillors nelson mandelas father gadla henry mphakanyiswa mandela was a local chief and.
Mandela emphasised reconciliation between the countrys racial groups and created the truth and.
His teacher when mandela was about nine his father came to stay at.
The source of his surname because mandela was the kings child by a.
African culture making his first nonxhosa friend a speaker of sotho and coming.
