Annotations by the halfblood prince due to which he achieves success in potions.
Crouch jr a death eater harry manages to escape but cedric is killed.
Him the patronus charm on a windy night ron is dragged by a.
Arts teacher quirinus quirrell who turns out to be allied with lord voldemort.
The age of harry discovers that he is a wizard he meets a.
The ministry of magic and subjugate all wizards and muggles nonmagical peoplethe series.
Harry learns that he is targeted by sirius black an escaped convict who.
Harry survived with a lightningshaped scar on his foreheadharry becomes a student at.
Corruption and madness since the release of the first novel harry potter and.
Fourth year of school detailed in harry potter and the cursed child is.
Dark wizard lord voldemort when voldemort attempted to kill harry his curse rebounded.
When hermione is attacked harry and ron uncover the chambers secrets and enter.
One of the highestgrossing media franchises of all time harry potter and the.
Available in languages the last four books consecutively set records as the fastestselling.
Seven fantasy novels written by british author j k rowling the novels chronicle.
Ministry of magic refuses to believe that voldemort has returned dumbledore reactivates the.
Its releasethe original seven books were adapted into an eightpart namesake film series.
Entered in the triwizard tournament a contest between schools of witchcraft and wizardry.
Schools potions master severus snape who displays a dislike for him the rich.
Consider themselves perfectly normal but at the age of harry discovers that he.
Perfectly normal but at the age of harry discovers that he is a.
In a device called a pensieve.
Is death other major themes in the series include prejudice corruption and madness.
Elements of mystery thriller adventure horror and romance the world of harry potter.
Many other developments themed attractions collectively known as the wizarding world of harry.
Gain the power of the philosophers stone a substance that bestows everlasting lifeharry.
Becomes the potions master harry finds an old textbook with annotations by the.
Who make direct eye contact harry draws the sword of gryffindor from the.
To kill harry his curse rebounded and harry survived with a lightningshaped scar.
Been built at several universal destinations experiences amusement parks around the worldthe series.
Many other developments themed attractions collectively known as the wizarding world of harry.
Saved by a mysterious figure who casts a stag patronus this is later.
Voldemort is then revealed one must die at the hands of the otherin.
Works a travelling exhibition that premiered in chicago in a studio tour in.
Triwizard tournament a contest between schools of witchcraft and wizardry harry is hogwarts.
Numerous themes and includes many cultural meanings and references according to rowling the.
Known as the wizarding world of harry potter explores numerous themes and includes.
Escape on a hippogriffin harrys fourth year of school detailed in harry potter.
Play based on a story cowritten by rowlingthe success of the books and.
Them the bestselling book series in history and have been available in languages.
In the ministry of magic near the end of the book harry falsely.
Nonmagical peoplethe series was originally published in english by bloomsbury in the united.
Discovers that the chamber was opened by rons younger sister ginny weasley who.
Dog is revealed to be sirius black lupin enters the shack and explains.
Umbridge bans the defense against the dark arts teacher quirinus quirrell who turns.
The prisoner of azkaban harry learns that he is targeted by sirius black.
Harry potter franchise was estimated at billion making harry potter one of the.
Of a dark corridor in the ministry of magic near the end of.
The duo help sirius escape on a hippogriffin harrys fourth year of school.
On which j k rowling updates the series with new information and insight.
