At the time the disaster was still fresh in the headlines at a contentious town hall meeting days.
Of information act request seven people had developed suspicious symptoms all had sore or scratchy throats three had.
Chemical soup that was hard to test for and hard even to identify as a problem until after.
Survey responses taggart one of their last assignments is one of the closest residential streets to the norfolk.
The next monday the atsdr team made up of doctors and epidemiologists serving in the commissioned corps of.
The soil water and air they had been in east palestine and the surrounding area for a few.
Last assignments is one of the closest residential streets to the norfolk southern rail line that cuts through.
Briefed about the political leanings of residents here this corner of northeast ohio is nearly all white and.
Some have just tuned out anything to do with the derailment because theyre tired of hearing about it.
And drinking water in east palestine say theres no safety concern but symptoms return for some residents when.
The illnesses that people say theyve had headaches rashes sore throats cough and burning irritated eyes to potential.
A response on top of those uncertainties people in east palestine can be hard to contact many werent.
Against clear answers this was a chemical soup that was hard to test for and hard even to.
Were likely to be distrustful of government officials so were advised not to wear anything that had the.
Began knocking on doors along taggart street in east palestine ohio the investigators were trying to contact residents.
Had no idea a health study was in the works others lack internet access that would have allowed.
Just beyond their backyards four months later it is still the site of an active cleanup and some.
Life for the small town in northeastern ohio many who live on taggart saw the derailment and fire.
The heart of town it sits just a few feet from the site of the catastrophe that has.
By points over joe biden in the election one month later people living near a toxic train derailment.
According to an incident report obtained by cnn through a freedom of information act request seven people had.
Residents and ask about any health problems they had experienced since a car train derailed here february spilling.
Present the findings of their investigation to residents at a meeting at a local church alongside county and.
Kids are sick or my grandkids are sick before you guys are gon na do anything the next.
The derailed cars the chemical combinations may have had different effects than any single chemical alone one chemical.
The survey is called an ace an assessment of chemical exposure such studies are not common theyre conducted.
Precious data that may help crack the case soon or far off in the future a few days.
Shi and her partner ian dunn had dressed carefully for their work and not just because of the.
To untangle at least six hazardous substances were on the derailed cars the chemical combinations may have had.
Has upended life for the small town in northeastern ohio many who live on taggart saw the derailment.
Two members of the survey team complained of throat irritation their supervisor offered to take them out of.
Side of town she shouted nobody has come to us do i have to wait until i have.
Agency for toxic substances and disease registry or atsdr a littleknown division of the us centers for disease.
Members of the survey team complained of throat irritation their supervisor offered to take them out of the.
Some residents when they come home for brief visits especially among those whose homes are close to the.
The atsdr team made up of doctors and epidemiologists serving in the commissioned corps of the us public.
To me but connecting the illnesses that people say theyve had headaches rashes sore throats cough and burning.
To contact many werent in their homes when doortodoor efforts were underway and four months later some still.
A million pounds of hazardous chemicals into the soil water and air they had been in east palestine.
Site perhaps more than any other agency responding to the disaster the agency for toxic substances and disease.
Southern rail line that cuts through the heart of town it sits just a few feet from the.
Developed suspicious symptoms all had sore or scratchy throats three had headaches one experienced burning in their nose.
Any other agency responding to the disaster the agency for toxic substances and disease registry or atsdr a.
Contact many werent in their homes when doortodoor efforts were underway and four months later some still havent.
The guts to come up there to see if we are ok with a flyer that theyve given.
Report obtained by cnn through a freedom of information act request seven people had developed suspicious symptoms all.
Reported by cnn drove home the contradiction that some east palestine residents say theyve lived for months official.
Soup that was hard to test for and hard even to identify as a problem until after a.
Burning irritated eyes to potential chemical exposures isnt an easy or straightforward task on tuesday evening they are.
The small town in northeastern ohio many who live on taggart saw the derailment and fire unfold just.
