The Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, commonly referred to as SpaceX  is an American spacecraft manufacturer, launcher, and satellite communications company headquartered in Hawthorne, California.
It was founded in 2002 by Elon Musk with the goal of reducing space transportation costs to colonization of Mars.
The company manufactures the Falcon 9, Falcon Heavy, and Starship heavy-lift launch vehicles as well as rocket engines, the Cargo Dragon and Crew Dragon spacecraft; and the Starlink mega-constellation satellite.SpaceX offers commercial satellite-based internet service via its constellation of Starlink satellites, which became the largest-ever satellite constellation in January 2020 and as of December 2022 comprised more than 3,300 small satellites in orbit.
The company is also developing Starship, a privately funded, fully reusable, super heavy-lift launch system for interplanetary and orbital spaceflight.
On its failed first flight in April 2023, it became the largest and most powerful rocket ever flown.
Starship is intended to become SpaceX's primary orbital vehicle, supplanting the existing Falcon 9, Falcon Heavy, and Dragon fleet.SpaceX is the first private company to develop a liquid-propellant rocket that has reached orbit; to launch, orbit, and recover a spacecraft; to send a spacecraft to the International Space Station; and to send astronauts to orbit and to the International Space Station.
It is also the first organization of any type to achieve a vertical propulsive landing of an orbital rocket booster and the first to reuse such a booster.
SpaceX's Falcon 9 rockets have landed and reflown more than 150 times.
In early 2001, Elon Musk donated US$100,000 to the Mars Society and joined its board of directors for a short time.
: 30–31  He gave a plenary talk at their fourth convention where he announced Mars Oasis, a project to land a greenhouse and grow plants on Mars.
Musk initially attempted to acquire a Dnepr ICBM for the project through Russian contacts from Jim Cantrell.
Two months later, however, the United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty and created the Missile Defense Agency, increasing tensions with Russia and generating new strategic interest for rapid and re-usable launch capability similar to the DC-X.
When Musk returned to Moscow, Russia, with Michael Griffin (who led the CIA's venture capital arm In-Q-Tel ), they found the Russians increasingly unreceptive.
On the flight home Musk announced he could start a company to build the affordable rockets they needed instead.
By applying vertical integration,  using cheap commercial off-the-shelf components when possible,  and adopting the modular approach of modern software engineering, Musk believed SpaceX could significantly cut launch price.
Griffin would later be appointed NASA administrator,  conceive the COTS program, and approve SpaceX for the $278 million award in 2006 before SpaceX had flown any rockets.
In early 2002, Musk started to look for staff for his company, soon to be named SpaceX.
Musk approached rocket engineer Tom Mueller (later SpaceX's CTO of propulsion) and invited him to become his business partner.
Mueller agreed to work for Musk, and thus SpaceX was born.
SpaceX was first headquartered in a warehouse in El Segundo, California.
Early SpaceX employees, such as Tom Mueller (CTO), Gwynne Shotwell (COO), and Chris Thompson (VP of Operations), came from neighboring TRW and Boeing corporations following the cancellation of the Brilliant Pebbles program.
By November 2005, the company had 160 employees.
Musk personally interviewed and approved all of SpaceX's early employees.
Musk has stated that one of his goals with SpaceX is to decrease the cost and improve the reliability of access to space, ultimately by a factor of ten.
SpaceX developed its first orbital launch vehicle, the Falcon 1, with internal funding.
The Falcon 1 was an expendable two-stage-to-orbit small-lift launch vehicle.The total development cost of Falcon 1 was approximately $90 million  to $100 million.
The Falcon name was adopted from the DARPA Falcon Project, part of the Prompt Global Strike program of the US military.
In 2005, SpaceX announced plans to pursue a human-rated commercial space program through the end of the decade, a program that would later become the Dragon spacecraft.
In 2006, the company was selected by NASA and awarded $396 million to provide crew and cargo resupply demonstration contracts to the ISS under the COTS program.
The first two Falcon 1 launches were purchased by the United States Department of Defense under a program that evaluates new US launch vehicles suitable for use by DARPA.
The first three launches of the rocket, between 2006 and 2008, all resulted in failures, which almost ended the company.
Financing for Tesla Motors had failed, as well,  and consequently Tesla, SolarCity, and Musk personally were all nearly bankrupt at the same time.
Musk was reportedly "waking from nightmares, screaming and in physical pain" because of the stress.
The financial situation started to turn around with the first successful launch achieved on the fourth attempt on 28 September 2008.
Musk split his remaining $30 million between SpaceX and Tesla, and NASA awarded the first Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) contract awarding $1.6 billion to SpaceX in December, thus financially saving the company.
Based on these factors and the further business operations they enabled, the Falcon 1 was soon retired following its second successful, and fifth total, launch in July 2009; this allowed SpaceX to focus company resources on the development of a larger orbital rocket, the Falcon 9.
Gwynne Shotwell was also promoted to company president at this time, for her role in successfully negotiating the CRS contract with the NASA Administrator (and former SpaceX contractor) Michael Griffin.
Griffin later estimated that SpaceX was around 85% funded by the federal government, mostly through his NASA awards, with the remaining 15% funding split between Elon Musk and other private investors.
He felt the amount of government funding was "excessive in his view" compared with what he originally envisioned for the commercial space program.
SpaceX originally intended to follow its light Falcon 1 launch vehicle with an intermediate capacity vehicle, the Falcon 5.
The company instead decided in 2005 to proceed with the development of the Falcon 9, a reusable heavier lift vehicle.
Development of the Falcon 9 was accelerated by NASA, which committed to purchasing several commercial flights if specific capabilities were demonstrated.
This started with seed money from the Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) program in 2006.
The overall contract award was $278 million to provide development funding for the Dragon spacecraft, Falcon 9, and demonstration launches of Falcon 9 with Dragon.
As part of this contract, the Falcon 9 launched for the first time in June 2010 with the Dragon Spacecraft Qualification Unit, using a mockup of the Dragon spacecraft.The first operational Dragon spacecraft was launched in December 2010 aboard COTS Demo Flight 1, the Falcon 9's second flight, and safely returned to Earth after two orbits, completing all its mission objectives.
By December 2010, the SpaceX production line was manufacturing one Falcon 9 and Dragon every three months.
In April 2011, as part of its second-round Commercial Crew Development (CCDev) program, NASA issued a $75 million contract for SpaceX to develop an integrated launch escape system for Dragon in preparation for human-rating it as a crew transport vehicle to the ISS.
NASA awarded SpaceX a fixed-price Space Act Agreement (SAA) to produce a detailed design of the crew transportation system in August 2012.
In early 2012, approximately two-thirds of SpaceX stock was owned by Musk  and his seventy million shares were then estimated to be worth $875 million on private markets,  valuing SpaceX at $1.3 billion.
In May 2012, with the Dragon C2+ launch Dragon became the first commercial spacecraft to deliver cargo to the International Space Station.
