The legal institution of human chattel slavery, comprising the enslavement primarily of Africans and African Americans, was prevalent in the United States of America from its founding in 1776 until 1865, predominantly in the South.
Slavery was established throughout European colonization in the Americas.
From 1526, during early colonial days, it was practiced in what became Britain's colonies, including the Thirteen Colonies that formed the United States.
Under the law, an enslaved person was treated as property that could be bought, sold, or given away.
Slavery lasted in about half of U.S. states until abolition.
In the decades after the end of Reconstruction, many of slavery's economic and social functions were continued through segregation, sharecropping, and convict leasing.By the time of the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783), the status of enslaved people had been institutionalized as a racial caste associated with African ancestry.
During and immediately following the Revolution, abolitionist laws were passed in most Northern states and a movement developed to abolish slavery.
The role of slavery under the United States Constitution (1789) was the most contentious issue during its drafting.
Although the creators of the Constitution never used the word "slavery", the final document, through the three-fifths clause, gave slave owners disproportionate political power by augmenting the congressional representation and the Electoral College votes of slaveholding states.
The Fugitive Slave Clause of the Constitution—Article IV, Section 2, Clause 3—provided that, if a slave escaped to another state, the other state had to return the slave to his or her master.
This clause was implemented by the Fugitive Slave Act of 1793, passed by Congress.
All Northern states had abolished slavery in some way by 1805; sometimes, abolition was a gradual process, a few hundred people were enslaved in the Northern states as late as the 1840 census.
Some slaveowners, primarily in the Upper South, freed their slaves, and philanthropists and charitable groups bought and freed others.
The Atlantic slave trade was outlawed by individual states beginning during the American Revolution.
The import trade was banned by Congress in 1808, although smuggling was common thereafter.
It has been estimated that about 30% of congressmen who were born before 1840 were, at some time in their lives, owners of slaves.
The rapid expansion of the cotton industry in the Deep South after the invention of the cotton gin greatly increased demand for slave labor, and the Southern states continued as slave societies.
The United States became ever more polarized over the issue of slavery, split into slave and free states.
Driven by labor demands from new cotton plantations in the Deep South, the Upper South sold more than a million slaves who were taken to the Deep South.
The total slave population in the South eventually reached four million.
As the United States expanded, the Southern states attempted to extend slavery into the new western territories to allow proslavery forces to maintain their power in the country.
The new territories acquired by the Louisiana Purchase and the Mexican Cession were the subject of major political crises and compromises.
By 1850, the newly rich, cotton-growing South was threatening to secede from the Union, and tensions continued to rise.
Bloody fighting broke out over slavery in the Kansas Territory.
Slavery was defended in the South as a "positive good", and the largest religious denominations split over the slavery issue into regional organizations of the North and South.When Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 election on a platform of halting the expansion of slavery, seven slave states seceded to form the Confederacy.
Shortly afterward, on April 12, 1861, the Civil War began when Confederate forces attacked the U.S. Army's Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina.
Four additional slave states then joined the Confederacy after Lincoln, on April 15, called forth in response "the militia of the several States of the Union, to the aggregate number of seventy-five thousand, in order to suppress" the rebellion.
During the war some jurisdictions abolished slavery and, due to Union measures such as the Confiscation Acts and the Emancipation Proclamation, the war effectively ended slavery in most places.
After the Union victory, the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified on December 6, 1865, prohibiting "slavery [and] involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime."
In 1508, Juan Ponce de León established the Spanish settlement in Puerto Rico, which used the native Taínos for labor.
The Taínos were largely exterminated by war, overwork and diseases brought by the Spanish.
In 1513, to supplement the dwindling Taíno population, the first enslaved African people were imported to Puerto Rico.
The abolition of Indian slavery in 1542 with the New Laws increased the demand for African slaves.
A century and a half later, the British conducted enslaving raids in what is now Georgia, Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida, and possibly Alabama.
The Charles Town slave trade, which included both trading and direct raids by colonists,  was the largest among the British colonies in North America.
Between 1670 and 1715, between 24,000 and 51,000 captive Native Americans were exported from South Carolina – more than the number of Africans imported to the colonies of the future United States during the same period.
Additional enslaved Native Americans were exported from South Carolina to Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts.
The historian Alan Gallay says, "the trade in Indian slaves was at the center of the English empire's development in the American South.
The trade in Indian slaves was the most important factor affecting the South in the period 1670 to 1715"; intertribal wars to capture slaves destabilized English colonies, Spanish Florida, and French Louisiana.
The first Africans enslaved within continental North America arrived via Santo Domingo to the San Miguel de Gualdape colony (most likely located in the Winyah Bay area of present-day South Carolina), founded by Spanish explorer Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón in 1526.
The ill-fated colony was almost immediately disrupted by a fight over leadership, during which the enslaved people revolted and fled the colony to seek refuge among local Native Americans.
De Ayllón and many of the colonists died shortly afterward of an epidemic and the colony was abandoned.
The settlers and the enslaved people who had not escaped returned to Santo Domingo.
On August 28, 1565, St. Augustine, Florida, was founded by the Spanish conquistador Don Pedro Menendez de Aviles, and he brought three enslaved Africans with him.
During the 16th and 17th centuries, St. Augustine was the hub of the trade in enslaved people in Spanish Florida and the first permanent settlement in what would become the continental United States to include enslaved Africans.
The first birth of an enslaved African in what is now the United States was Agustín, who was born in St. Augustine in 1606.
In the early years of the Chesapeake Colonies (Virginia and Maryland), colonial officials found it difficult to attract and retain laborers under the harsh frontier conditions, and there was a high mortality rate.
Many laborers came from Britain as indentured laborers, signing contracts of indenture to pay for their passage, upkeep, and training with work, usually on farms.
The colonies had agricultural economies.
These indentured laborers were often young people who intended to become permanent residents.
